1 
Keywords: Cognitive informatics, cognitive computing, comprehension, conceptual model, mathematical model, process model, knowledge engineering, LRMB, OAR, RTPA, concept algebra INTRODUCTION Despite of several-decade advances in computer science and artificial intelligence (AI), computers are still passive machines (Wilson and Keil, 2001; Wang, 2002a, 2009b). 
However, human beings are much active and intelligent in problem solving and decision-making, although they are not good at memory and retrieving of information. 
In general, computers can store a huge amount of data efficiently; while human beings make sense of or comprehend them in order to make them useful for the society and everyday lives. 
Cognitive Informatics (CI) is a new and interdisciplinary research area that studies how information is processed and represented by human brain and how this knowledge can be applied in computing and information sciences (Wang, 2002a, 2003, 2007b; Wang, Kinsner and Zhang, 2009; Wang et al., 2009). 
Cognitive informatics treats the natural world as a triple <I, E, M> where I is information, E energy, and M matter. 
Information is used to model the abstract world, whereas energy and matter are used to model the physical world. 
A Layered Reference Model of the Brain (LRMB) is developed in (Wang et al, 2006) that identified 43 cognitive processes at seven layers known as the sensation, memory, perception, action, metacognitive, meta-inference, and higher cognitive layers from the bottom up. In cognitive informatics, cognitive science, AI, and computational intelligence, comprehension is identified as an ability to understand something, which indicates an intelligent power of abstract thought and reasoning of humans or intelligent systems. 
It is curious to explore the internal process of comprehension in the brain and to explain its basic mechanisms, because comprehension is one of the fundamental processes of brain at the higher cognitive layer according to LRMB. 
Two denotational mathematical means known as concept algebra (Wang, 2008c) and Real-Time Process Algebra (RTPA) (Wang, 2002b, 2007a) will be 2 introduced in order to formally deal with the modeling of the highly abstract cognitive entity and process of comprehension and other cognitive processes. 
This paper attempts to build a formal model for the fundamental cognitive process of comprehension. 
The mechanism and process of comprehension are systematically explained with its conceptual, mathematical, and process models. 
The paper discusses the conceptual model of comprehension in cognitive informatics and cognitive psychology based on the computational, functional, and cognitive models of the brain developed in (Wang and Wang, 2007). 
The Object-Attribute-Relation (OAR) model for internal knowledge representation (Wang, 2007c) and concept algebra are introduced, which forms a foundation for explaining the cognitive mechanisms of comprehension. 
The mathematical model of comprehension is developed based on OAR and concept algebra. 
Then, comprehension as a cognitive process is conceptually elaborated and formally modeled in RTPA, which provides a rigorous description of the comprehension process and its interaction with other cognitive processes of the brain. 
THE CONCEPTUAL MODEL OF COMPREHENSION The linguistic meaning of comprehension is an ability to understand the meaning of a concept or an action based on the intelligent power of abstract thought and reasoning. 
The basic unit of comprehension is a concept (Wallas, 1926; Hurley, 1997; Ganter and Wille, 1999; Wang, 2008c). 
Therefore, large scope comprehension at sentence and article levels may be analyzed and synthesized by concept-level comprehensions from the top down or the bottom up. Concepts, Semantics, and Comprehension The conceptual mode of comprehension to a given concept can be described by the analysis of the intension and extension of the concept and its relations to the entire knowledge of a person in term of an OAR model. 
Definition 1. A concept is a basic cognitive unit to identify and/or model a real-world concrete entity and a perceived-world abstract subject. 
A concept in linguistics is a noun or noun-phrase that serves as the subject of a to-be statement (Hurley, 1997; Ganter and Wille, 1999; Wang, 2008c). 
Concepts in cognitive informatics (Wang, 2002a, 2003, 2007b; Wang et al., 2009) are an abstract structure that carries certain meaning in almost all cognitive processes such as comprehension, thinking, learning, and reasoning. 
A concept can be identified by its intension and extension (Smith and Medin, 1981; Hurley, 1997; Ganter and Wille, 1999; Wang, 2008c). 
The intension of a concept is the attributes or properties that a concept connotes. 
The extension of a concept is the members or instances that the concept denotes. 
For example, the intension of the concept pen connotes the attributes of being a writing tool, with a nib, and with ink. 
The extension of the pen denotes all kinds of pens that share the common attributes as specified in the intension of the concept, such as a ballpoint pen, a fountain pen, and a quill pen. 
Definition 2. Semantics is the meaning of symbols, notates, concepts, functions, and behaviors, as well as their relations that can be deduced onto a set of predefined entities and/or known concepts. 
Semantic analysis and comprehension are a deductive cognitive process. 
According to the OAR model for internal knowledge representation (Wang, 2007c), the semantics of a sentence in a natural language may be considered having been understood when: a) The logical relations of parts of the sentence are clarified; and b) All parts of sentence are reduced to the terminal entities, which are either a real-world image or a primitive abstract concept. 
3 Definition 3. Comprehension is a higher cognitive process of the brain that searches relations between a given concept and a set of attribute (A), object (O), and/or relations (R) in long-term memory (LTM) in order to establish a representative OAR model for the concept by connecting it to appropriate clusters of the LTM. 
In cognitive psychology, comprehension involves constructing an internal representation based on existing knowledge previously gained in the brain (Quillian, 1968; Matlin, 1998). 
Polya (1957) considered that when solving a problem one goes through the following four phases: a) Understanding (comprehending) the problem; b) Generating one or more hypotheses; c) Testing hypotheses; and d) Checking the result. 
In Polya’s generic problem solving model, problem comprehension is the first and important step toward problem solving. 
In cognitive psychology, comprehension involves constructing an internal representation according to Matlin (1998). 
Both Polya and Matlin agree that comprehension has a relation with the comprehender’s background knowledge. 
This indicates that whatever one is trying to comprehend one relies on one’s existing knowledge previously gained in the brain. 
The OAR Model for Internal Knowledge Representation It is recognized that the natural intelligence is memory-based. 
There are sensory-buffer memory (SBM), short-term memory (STM), long-term memory (LTM), and action-buffer memory (ABM) in the brain. 
The cognitive model of LTM is developed in (Wang, 2007c) as an OAR model where the object is an abstract model of a physical entity or an abstract artifact, and the attribute is a sub-object that describes detailed properties of an object. 
To rigorously explain the hierarchical and dynamic neural cluster model of memory at neurological and physiological levels, a logical model of memory is needed as given below known as the OAR model. 
Definition 4. The Object-Attribute-Relation (OAR) model of LTM can be described as a triple, i.e.: OAR  (O, A, R) (1) where O is a finite set of objects identified by unique symbolic names, i.e.: O = {o 1 , o 2 , …, o i , …, o n } (2) For each given o i ∈ O, 1≤ i ≤ n, A i is a finite set of attributes for characterizing the object, i.e.: A i = {A i1 , A i2 , …, A ij , …, A im } (3) where each o i ∈ O or A ij ∈ A i , 1≤ i ≤ n, 1≤ j ≤ m, is physiologically represented by a neuron in the brain. 
For each given o i ∈ O, 1≤ i ≤ n, R i is a set of relations between o i and other objects or attributes of other objects, i.e.: R i = {R i1 , R i2 , …, R ik , …, R iq } (4) where R ik is a relation between two objects, o i and o i’ , and their attributes A ij and A i’j , 1≤ i ≤ n, 1≤ j ≤ m, i.e.: R ik = r (o i , o i’ ) | r (o i , A ij ) | r (A ij , o i’ ) | r (A ij , A i’j ), 1≤ k ≤ q (5) 4 To a certain extent, the entire knowledge in the brain can be modeled as a global OAR model as illustrated in Fig. 1. O1 A11 O2 A12 A13 A22 A23 A2j A1i A2m' A21 A1m r(O 1 , O 2 ) r(A 11 , A 21 ) r(O 1 , A 1m ) r(O 2 , A 2m’ ) r(O 1 , A 2j ) r(O 2 , A 1i ) Figure 1. The OAR model of logical memory architectures According to the OAR model, the result of knowledge acquisition or learning can be embodied by the updating of the existing OAR in the brain. 
In other words, learning is a dynamic composition of the existing OAR in LTM and the currently created sub-OAR as expressed below. 
Theorem 1. The entire knowledge model maintained in the brain, or the representation of learning results, states that the internal memory in the form of the OAR structure can be updated by the composition operation  between the existing OAR and the newly created sub-OAR (sOAR), i.e.: OAR’ ST  OARST  sOAR’ ST = OARST  (O s , A s , R s ) (6) The above theory of knowledge acquisition lays an important foundation for learning theories and pedagogy. 
The OAR model can be used to describe information representation and its relation to the external world. 
The external world is described in terms of real entities whereas the internal world represented by virtual entities and objects. 
The internal world consists of two layers: the image and abstract layers. 
Virtual entity is an image of the real entity in internal world and located at the image layer. 
Objects in the abstract layer are grouped into two classes: the meta and derived objects. 
Meta objects have direct relations to virtual entities, while derived objects are represented internally without direct relations to virtual entities. 
Investigation into the cognitive models of information and knowledge representation in the brain is perceived to be one of the fundamental research areas that help to reveal the mechanisms of the brain. 
The OAR model developed by Wang (2007c) describes human memory, particularly LTM, by using the relational metaphor, rather than the traditional container metaphor that used to be adopted in psychology, computing, and information science. 
The OAR model shows that human memory and knowledge are represented by relations, i.e. connections of synapses between neurons, rather than by the neurons themselves as the traditional container metaphor suggested. 
The OAR model can be used to explain a wide range of human information processing mechanisms and cognitive processes. 
Knowledge as the content of memory is conventionally represented by the container metaphor (Hampton, 1997; Wilson and Keil; 2001), which was not able to explain how a huge amount of knowledge 5 may be retained without increasing the number of neurons in the brain. 
However, the relational metaphor based on the OAR model may better explain the dynamic mechanisms of knowledge and memory [Wang, 2008c]. 
Definition 5. The relational metaphor of knowledge perceives that the brain does not create new neurons to represent new information, instead it generates new synapses between the existing neurons in order to represent new information. 
The relational model of knowledge is supported by the physiological foundation of neural informatics known as the dynamic neural cluster model. 
Corollary 1. The Dynamic Neural Cluster (DNC) model states that the LTM is dynamic, where new neurons (to represent objects or attributes) are assigning, and new connections (to represent relations) are creating and reconfiguring over time in the brain. 
THE MATHEMATICAL MODEL OF COMPREHENSION The mathematical model of comprehension is a mapping from a certain concept to a concept network expressed by the OAR model, which involves concept establishment, OAR interpretation, OAR updating, and memorization. 
Abstract Concept and Concept Comprehension A concept is a basic cognitive unit of knowledge and inferences by which the meanings and semantics of a real-world entity or an abstract entity may be represented and embodied based on the OAR model. 
Before an abstract concept is defined, the semantic environment or context [Medin and Shoben, 1988; Murphy, 1993; Codin, Missaoui and Alaoui, 1995; Hampton, 1997; Hurley, 1997; Ganter and Wille, 1999; Wang, 2008c] in a given language, is introduced. 
Definition 6. Let  denote a finite nonempty set of objects, and  be a finite nonempty set of attributes, then a semantic environment or context Θ is denoted as a triple, i.e.: () ,, = | | | Θ →→ →→:        (7) where  is a set of relations between  and  , and | demotes an alternative relation. 
Concepts in denotational mathematics [Wang, 2008a, 2009d, 2010b; Wang, Zadeh and Yaom 2009] are an abstract structure that carries certain meaning in almost all cognitive processes such as thinking, learning, and reasoning. 
Definition 7. An abstract concept c is a 5-tuple, i.e.: (,, , , ) cio c OAR R R (8) where 6 • O is a finite nonempty set of objects of the concept, O = {o 1 , o 2 , …, o m } ⊆ Þ, where Þ denotes a power set of . • A is a finite nonempty set of attributes, A = {a 1 , a 2 , …, a n } ⊆ Þ. • R c = O × A is a set of internal relations. 
• ' , ' ' i R A AA C A c  , is a set of input relations, where C′ is a set of external concepts, ' C C  . 
For convenience, ' i R AA may be simply denoted as '. i R Cc • R o ⊆ c × C′ is a set of output relations. 
Definition 8. The intension of a concept c = (O, A, R c , R i , R o ), c* , is represented by its set of attributes A, i.e.: # 1 ( )= Þ j O cio o i c* O,A,R ,R ,R A A = ⊆   (9) where Þ denotes a power set of , and # is the cardinal operator that counts the number of elements in a given set. 
Definition 8 indicates that the narrow sense or the exact semantics of a concept is determined by the set of common attributes shared by all of its objects. 
In contrary, the broad sense or the rough semantics of a concept is referred to the set of all attributes identified by any of its objects as defined below. 
Definition 9. The extension of a concept c = (O, A, R c , R i , R o ), + c , is represented by its set of objects O, i.e.: ( ) ={ } + cio 12 m c O, A, R , R , R O o , o , ..., o ⊆ þ (10) where an object of a concept o is a derived instantiation of the concept that implements an end product of the concept, oO⊂ , i.e.: ( , , , , ), . 
, , ( , , | , , {( , )}) cio o ii o ci c i o ooo o oo c O A R R R o co o O R oAR R A AR o AR co ∀ = ⊂ ≡∅ ⇒ ⊇=× = (11) The formation of a concept by indentifying its intention (attributes) and extension (objects) is the fundamental cognitive approach to concept comprehension. 
Higher level comprehension at sentence and article levels can be manipulated by concept relational and compositional operations as defined in concept algebra. 
Concept Algebra for Modeling the Mechanisms of Comprehension Based on the abstract concept model, any real-world and concrete concept can be rigorously modeled. 
Further, a set of algebraic operations can be defined on abstract concepts, which form a mathematical structure known as concept algebra (Wang, 2008c). 
Definition 10. A concept algebra CA on a given semantic environment Θ C is a triple, i.e.: rc ( , , ) = ({ , , }, { , }, ) cio CC CA C OP O A R , R , RΘ •• Θ (12) where OP = {• r , • c } are the sets of relational and compositional operations on abstract concepts. 
7 Definition 11. The relational operations • r in concept algebra encompass 8 comparative operators for manipulating the algebraic relations between concepts, i.e.:          r = { } (13) where the relational operators stand for related, independent, subconcept, superconcept, equivalent, consistent, comparison, and definition, respectively. 
Definition 12. The compositional operations • c in concept algebra encompass 9 associative operators for manipulating the algebraic compositions among concepts, i.e.:                c = { , } (14) where the compositional operators stand for inheritance, tailoring, extension, substitute, composition, decomposition, aggregation, specification, and instantiation, respectively. 
Concept algebra deals with the algebraic relations and associational rules of abstract concepts. 
The associations of concepts form a foundation to denote complicated relations between concepts in knowledge representation. 
Detailed definitions of the algebraic operations in concept algebra have been provided in (Wang, 2008c). 
On the basis of concept algebra, a generic model of human knowledge may be rigorously described as follows. 
Definition 13. A generic knowledge K is an n-nary relation R k among a set of n concepts in C, i.e.: : X ki i=1 K = R C C→ n () (15) where = Ui i=1 C C n , and R k ∈ Γ. In Definition 13 the relation R k is one of the concept operations defined in concept algebra (Eq. 
14) that serves as a set of knowledge composing rules. 
A complex knowledge is a composition of multiple concepts in the form of a concept network. 
Definition 14. A concept network CN is a hierarchical network of concepts interlinked by the set of nine associations ℜ defined in concept algebra, i.e.: : XX → nn κi j i=1 i= j CN = R C C (16) where R k ∈ Γ. Because the relations between concepts are transitive, the generic topology of knowledge is a hierarchical concept network. 
The advantages of the hierarchical knowledge architecture in the form of concept networks are as follows: 8 a) Dynamic: The knowledge networks may be updated dynamically along with information acquisition and learning without destructing the existing concept nodes and relational links. 
b) Evolvable: The knowledge networks may grow adaptively without changing the overall and existing structure of the hierarchical network. 
THE COGNITIVE MODEL OF THE COMPREHENSION PROCESS The cognitive informatics model of comprehension is a cognitive process at the high-level cognitive layer according to LRMB (Wang et al., 2006). 
The cognitive model of the comprehension process can be conceptually modeled by the following steps: a. To search relations from real entities to virtual entities and/or existing objects and attributes. 
b. To build a partial or adequate OAR model of the entity. 
c. To wrap up the sub-OAR model by classifying and connecting it to appropriate clusters of the entire OAR in LTM. 
d. To memorize the new OAR model and its connections in LTM. 
The cognitive process of comprehension is informally modeled as shown in Fig. 2. We assume that three other low-level cognitive processes, search, memorization, and knowledge representation, as shown in Fig. 3, have already been defined (Wang et al., 2006) according to the LRMB. 
As shown in Fig. 2, in the first step to comprehend a given real entity or concept, the knowledge manipulation engine of the brain searches the corresponding virtual entity and its relations to objects in the abstract layer of the memory. 
Depending on the results of the search for relations, the outcomes of the next step may be different. 
The ideal search result is that adequate relations have been found. 
In his case, comprehension is almost reached. 
The other possible result is that a partial comprehension, a very low level of comprehension, or a virtually no comprehension is obtained when a partial OAR model is built. 
In the first two cases, the partial OAR model is built as a subOAR model, where no sufficient relations have been found. 
In the last case, for a totally new concept, the search result is incomprehension where only an ID corresponding to the concept is created without any known relations to existing knowledge. 
All the cases indicate that, in cognitive informatics, everything is comprehensible except the extent of comprehension may vary in a range of 0% to 100%. 
The comprehension process starts with identifying an input object (Box 2), which is a virtual entity or concept. 
For instance, when one is reading a text, a word or term may be identified whose meaning is not obvious. 
This triggers a cognitive process to comprehend the meaning of the concept. 
Another example can be that when one watches a picture one may not understand what it denotes or the meaning of some part of it may not be clear. 
In the above examples, the input objects can be a word, concept, formula, shape, picture, and the like. 
When the object has been identified, the brain searches for possible relations between existing objects in the OAR model of LTM and the input object from external world. 
The brain looks for relations at the image layer and then the abstract layer of memory, respectively (Boxes 3 and 4). Once a connection with existing objects is found, the next step is to find out related attributes and relations in order to build an sOAR model for the object under comprehension (Box 5). If the problem domain is familiar to be understood, it is more likely that more related objects exist in LTM. 
After these steps, the brain checks if the result of searching is adequate for building an sOAR model for the object (Box 6). 9 Figure 2. The cognitive model of the comprehension process Comprehension Search The OAR model for knowledge representation Memorization Layer 7 Layer 5 Layer 5 Figure 3. Interaction between the comprehension process and other meta-cognitive processes No No Yes Incomprehension identified Yes Identify object Begin Search at image layer Search at abstract layer Find related attributes and relations Are findings adequate? 
Comprehension achieved and satisfied Build an appropriate sOAR model Are findings adequate? 
Memorize the results of sOAR in LTM Search external resources and information End ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) ( 8 ) ( 9 ) ( 13 ) ( 10 ) ( 11 ) ( 12 ) 10 If the findings are sufficient, the brain builds an sOAR model for the given object (Box 7). When the model is built, it needs to be connected with a cluster of existing knowledge. 
The brain classifies the sOAR model and connects it to the most appropriate cluster in the entire OAR model of LTM (Box 8). Only after this step, comprehension is achieved. 
However, if the findings are inadequate after the search, the comprehension process builds a partial sOAR with limited information and then, requires further actions to obtain additional information from external resources (Box 10). 
For example, if one could not recall or does not understand the meaning of a given word by existing knowledge, one may check a dictionary or encyclopedia. 
The search from external resources may be a repetitive process. 
For instance, if one cannot find the meaning of the word in the dictionary, then someone may be asked for its meaning as an alternative. 
After searching several times in external resources, the brain checks again whether findings are adequate (Box 11). 
If so, Steps 7 and 8 will be repeated. 
Otherwise, it is regarded as an incomprehension has been achieved (Box 12) at this given moment. 
But still the results are remembered in LTM. 
In the latter case, a partial sOAR model is stored and it may be simply an ID for an unknown concept for future comprehension. 
For example, when reading one may come across completely a new word that may neither be found from a dictionary nor from all friends. 
Therefore, the word may simply be remembered by rote, without understanding its meaning. 
In this incomprehension case, one may remember the result as “the word has seven letters”, “it starts with letter k”, and “it resembles the word …” etc. 
without any significant attribute. 
For another example, when one watches a picture of something but cannot figure out what it may denote, one can see that some parts of the picture resemble a hand, and other parts may resemble something else, but what the whole picture expresses cannot be understood. 
In both examples, the brain builds a partial sOAR model with few insignificant attributes and relations for the limited clues in existing knowledge. 
The final step in the comprehension process is to memorize the sub-OAR model and the updated entire OAR in LTM (Box 9), by which a comprehension process is completed. 
FORMAL DESCRIPTION OF THE COMPREHENSION PROCESS On the basis of the explanation of the comprehension process based on the abstract concept and the OAR models as developed in proceeding sections, a rigorous description of the cognitive process of comprehension can be formally modeled using Real-Time Process Algebra (RTPA). 
An RTPA description of the comprehension process is provided in Fig. 4 based on the OAR representation of internal information and knowledge. 
The process numbers, PNN, used in Fig. 4 are corresponding to the labels identified in the boxes of Fig. 2, by which each part of the formal description can be mapped onto the flowgraph of the comprehension process. 
The relationship between the comprehension process and other meta-processes, such as search, memorization, and knowledge representation, are illustrated in Fig. 3 and specified in Fig 4. According to the LRMB model, the comprehension process belongs to Layer 7 – the higher cognitive functions of the brain. 
When it is functioning, the Layer 5 meta-processes such as search and memorization have to be called as supporting cognitive processes. 
11 ComprehensionProcess (I:: TheConceptS; O:: OAR(TheConceptS)ST, LcomprehensionN) ≙ {// I. Identify concept/object oS := TheConceptS // PNN = 2 // II. Search for related attributes and objects → ( // PNN =3 ( ScopeS := ImageLayerOfLTMS  Search (I:: (oS, ScopeS); O:: (ArST, RrST)) ) || // PNN = 4 ( ScopeS := AbstartcLayerOfLTMS  Search (I:: (oS, ScopeS); O:: (A r ST, R r ST)) ) ) // III. 
Built sub-OAR → ArST = {a1, a2, …, an} // PNN = 5 → R r ST = {o 1 , o 2 , …, o m } → (  (A r ST ⊆ A meta ST) ∧ (R r ST ⊆ O meta ST) ∧ (A r ST = φ ∨ R r ST = φ) // PNN = 6 → PL1S: sOAR(oS)ST = {oS, A r ST, R r ST} // PNN = 7 |  ~ → ScopeS := ExternalResourcesS // PNN = 10  Search (I:: oS, ScopeS; O:: A′ r ST, R′ r ST) → (  (A r ST ⊆ A meta ) ∧ (R r ST ⊆ O meta ) ∧ (A r ST = φ ∨ R r ST = φ) // PNN = 11 ⇥PL1S |  ~ → sOAR(oS)ST = {oS, ArST, RrST} // PNN = 12 ) ) // IV. Memorization → OAR’ST := OARST  sOARST  Memorization (OAR’ST ) // PNN = 9 } // PNN = 13 Figure 4. Formal description of the comprehension process in RTPA The formal description of the comprehension process serves for two important purposes. 
First, it demonstrates that how the cognitive functions of the brain may be explicitly described and simulated by a real-time computational process. 
Second, it shows that, in general, the human behavior in terms of a set of cognitive processes can be formally and accurately described by denotational mathematics, particularly concept algebra and real-time process algebra. 
6. CONCLUSIONS Comprehension has been identified as one of the fundamental processes of the brain at the higher cognitive layer according to LRMB. 
Although knowledge and information are powerful, before any information can be possessed and processed in the brain, it has to be comprehended properly. 
This paper has 12 explored the cognitive mechanisms and process of comprehension as one of the fundamental cognitive functions of the brain. 
The conceptual mode of comprehension has been described by the analysis of the intension and extension of a given concept and its relations to the entire knowledge of a learner in term of the OAR model. 
The mathematical model of comprehension is a mapping from a certain concept to a concept network in the form of OAR. 
The cognitive informatics model of comprehension is a cognitive process that implements the mapping between the given concept and the OAR model with the support of lower-level cognitive processes such as concept establishment, OAR interpretation, OAR updating, and memorization. 
The cognitive mechanisms and process of comprehension can be applied in a wide range of applications in cognitive informatics and computational intelligence such as machine learning, problem solving, and online document retrieving. 
In software engineering, program comprehension plays an important role in evolution and maintenance of legacy systems. 
Comprehension and elicitation of reusable part of code plays an important role in object-oriented programming as well. 
The cognitive informatics theory for the comprehension process provides inside to the study on program comprehension, and to the development of easy-to-comprehend software systems in software engineering. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The authors would like to acknowledge the Natural Science and Engineering Council of Canada (NSERC) for its partial support to this work. 
We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments and suggestions. 
REFERENCES Codin R., R. Missaoui, and H. Alaoui (1995), Incremental Concept Formation Algorithms Based on Galois (Concept) Lattices, Computational Intelligence, 11(2), 246-267. 
Ganter, B. and R. Wille (1999), Formal Concept Analysis, Springer, Berlin. 
Hampton, J.A. (1997), Psychological Representation of Concepts of Memory, Psychology Press, Hove, England, pp.81-110. 
Hurley, P.J. (1997), A Concise Introduction to Logic, 6th ed, Wadsworth Pub. 
Co., ITP, Belmony, CA. Matlin, M.W. (1998), Cognition, 4th ed., Harcourt Brace College Pub., NY. Medin, D.L. and E.J. 
Shoben (1988), Context and Structure in Conceptual Combination, Cognitive Psychology, 20, 158-190. 
Murphy, G.L. (1993), Theories and Concept Formation, in I.V. 
Mechelen et al. eds, Categories and Concepts, Theoretical Views and Inductive Data Analysis, Academic Press, NY, pp. 173-200. 
Polya, G. (1957), How to Solve It, Garden City, NY, Doubleday Anchor. 
Quillian, M.R. (1968), Semantic Memory, in M. Minsky ed., Semantic Information Processing, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. Smith, E.E. and D.L. 
Medin (1981), Categories and Concepts, Cambridge, MA, Harvard Univ. 
Press. 
Wallas, G. (1926), The Art of Thought, Harcourt-Brace, New York. 
Wang, Y. (2002a), Keynote: On Cognitive Informatics, Proc. 
1st IEEE International Conference on Cognitive Informatics (ICCI’02), Calgary, Canada, IEEE CS Press, August, 34-42. 
Wang, Y. (2002b), The Real-Time Process Algebra (RTPA), Annals of Software Engineering, 14, 235-274. 
13 Wang, Y. (2003), On Cognitive Informatics, Brain and Mind: A Transdisciplinary Journal of Neuroscience and Neurophilosophy, 4(2), pp.151-167. Wang, Y. (2007a), Software Engineering Foundations: A Software Science Perspective, CRC Series in Software Engineering, Vol. 
II, Auerbach Publications, NY, USA, July. 
Wang, Y. (2007b), The Theoretical Framework of Cognitive Informatics, International Journal of Cognitive Informatics and Natural Intelligence, 1(1), 1-27. 
Wang, Y. (2007c), The OAR Model of Neural Informatics for Internal Knowledge Representation in the Brain, International Journal of Cognitive Informatics and Natural Intelligence, 1(3), 64-75. 
Wang, Y. (2008a), On Contemporary Denotational Mathematics for Computational Intelligence, Transactions of Computational Science, 2, Springer, June, 6-29. 
Wang, Y. (2008c), On Concept Algebra: A Denotational Mathematical Structure for Knowledge and Software Modeling, International Journal of Cognitive Informatics and Natural Intelligence, 2(2), 1-19. 
Wang, Y. (2009b), On Cognitive Computing, International Journal of Software Science and Computational Intelligence, 1(3), 1-15. 
Wang, Y. (2009d), Paradigms of Denotational Mathematics for Cognitive Informatics and Cognitive Computing, Fundamenta Informaticae, 90(3), 282-303. 
Wang, Y. (2010b), Keynote: Cognitive Informatics and Denotational Mathematics Means for Brain Informatics, 1st Int’l Conference on Brain Informatics (ICBI'10), Toronto, Aug. 
Wang, Y. and Y. Wang (2006), Cognitive Informatics Models of the Brain, IEEE Trans. 
on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (C), 36(2), 203-207. 
Wang, Y., Y. Wang, S. Patel, and D. Patel (2006), A Layered Reference Model of the Brain (LRMB), IEEE Trans. 
on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C, 36(2), 124-133. 
Wang, Y., L.A. 
Zadeh, and Y. Yao (2009a), On the System Algebra Foundations for Granular Computing,” Int’l Journal of Software Science and Computational Intelligence, 1(1), 64-86. 
Wang, Y., W. Kinsner, and D. Zhang (2009b), Contemporary Cybernetics and its Faces of Cognitive Informatics and Computational Intelligence, IEEE Trans. 
on System, Man, and Cybernetics, Part B, 39(4), 823-833. 
Wang, Y., W. Kinsner, J.A. 
Anderson, D. Zhang, Y. Yao, P. Sheu, J. Tsai, W. Pedrycz, J.-C. 
Latombe, L.A. 
Zadeh, D. Patel, and C. Chan (2009c), A Doctrine of Cognitive Informatics, Fundam. 
Informatic., 90(3), 203228. 
Wilson, R.A. and F. C. Keil (2001), The MIT Encyclopedia of the Cognitive Sciences, MIT Press. 
Yingxu Wang is professor of cognitive informatics and software engineering, President of International Institute of Cognitive Informatics and Cognitive Computing (IICICC), and Director of Theoretical and Empirical Software Engineering Research Center (TESERC) at the University of Calgary. 
He is a Fellow of WIF, a P.Eng of Canada, a Senior Member of IEEE and ACM, and a member of ISO/IEC JTC1 and the Canadian Advisory Committee (CAC) for ISO. 
He received a PhD in Software Engineering from The Nottingham Trent University, UK, in 1997, and a BSc in Electrical Engineering from Shanghai Tiedao University in 1983. 
He has industrial experience since 1972 and has been a full professor since 1994. 
He was a visiting professor in the Computing Laboratory at Oxford University in 1995, Dept. 
of Computer Science at Stanford University in 2008, and the Berkeley Initiative in Soft Computing (BISC) Lab at University of California, Berkeley in 2008, respectively. 
He is the founder and steering committee chair of the annual IEEE International Conference on Cognitive Informatics (ICCI). 
He is founding Editor-in-Chief of International 14 Journal of Cognitive Informatics and Natural Intelligence (IJCINI), founding Editor-in-Chief of International Journal of Software Science and Computational Intelligence (IJSSCI), Associate Editor of IEEE Transactions on System, Man, and Cybernetics (Part A), Associate Editor of ASP Journal on Advanced Mathematics and Applications,, and Editor-in-Chief of CRC Book Series in Software Engineering. 
He is the initiator of a number of cutting-edge research fields such as cognitive informatics, denotational mathematics (such as concept algebra, system algebra, real-time process algebra (RTPA), granular algebra, visual semantic algebra, and inference algebra), abstract intelligence, theoretical software engineering, and built-in tests. 
He has published over 110 peer reviewed journal papers, 200+ peer reviewed full conference papers, and 12 books in cognitive informatics, software engineering, and computational intelligence. 
He is the recipient of dozens of leadership, research achievement, best paper, and teaching awards in the last 30 years. 
D. Gafurov received his Diploma in Computer Engineering from Technological University of Tajikistan (Tajikistan) in 2000 and his PhD in Computer Science from University of Oslo (Norway) in 2008. 
Previously he worked as an engineer-programmer at the Computer Center of Technological University of Tajikistan, and at the same time he was a part-time lecturer at the department of Programming and Information Technology at TUT (2000-2004). 
D. Gafurov also had visits at International Institute for Software Technology, United Nations University (Macau, China) in 2001 and at the department of Electrical and Computer Engineering of University of Calgary (Canada) in 2002. 
He is currently a researcher at Norwegian Information Security Laboratory, Gjøvik University College (Norway) and involved in EU funded project TURBINE (ICT-2007216339, www.turbine-project.eu). 
His current research interest includes biometrics, in particular performance evaluation of biometrics systems and human movement analysis for security applications. 