Key words: Native American, American Indian, post-secondary, persistence, retention. 
INTRODUCTION The academic disparities between Native Americans and whites have been discussed by a number of scholars (Tierney, 1992; Jackson, Smith and Hill, 2003; Brayboy and Castagno, 2011). 
In addition to the social justice issues, economic considerations militate towards developing solutions to this discrepancy. 
U.S. Census Bureau defines a Native American as an American Indian or Alaska Native- a person having origins in any of the original peoples of North and South America (including Central America) and who maintain tribal affiliation or community attachment. 
There were 2.9 million people who identified themselves as American Indian or Alaska Native (AIAN) without listing another ethnicity in the U.S. during the 2010 census, with another 2.3 million identifying themselves as Native American in combination with one or more other races. 
Richard Mosholder 1 *, Bryan Waite 2 and Christopher Goslin 3 1 Department of First Year Programs, Kennesaw State University, Kennesaw, Georgia,1000 Chastain Road, Kennesaw, GA, 30144. 
2 Department of Secondary Education, Utah Valley University, Orem, Utah. 
3 Department of College Success Studies, Utah Valley University, Orem, Utah. 
*Corresponding author. 
E-mail: rmoshold@kennesaw.edu. 
Academia Journal of Educational Research; Mosholder e al. 073 Those who identify themselves as Native Americans alone are the least likely racial/ethnic group tracked in post-secondary American education to graduate from college, with only 10.3% who were at least 25 years of age with a bachelor's degree and 22.3% enrolled in college or graduate school compared with 28.2% over 25 with a bachelor's degree or higher and 28.3% enrolled in college for whites. 
Almost 23% lived below the federal poverty level, compared to about 15% for whites, with a per capita income in 2010 of $15,671 versus a total U. S. population per capita income of $26,059. 
The unemployment rate for Native Americans was almost 18% in 2010, about twice the rate for whites (U.S. 
Census 2010). 
Tribal communities face many other economic and social hurdles. 
Unemployment rates range from 45 to 80%, depending on the remoteness of the reservation and the suicide rate for Native Americans is more than twice that for other tracked racial/ethnic groups. 
The alcohol related death rate is very high as is the rate of single-parent households (Ortiz and HeavyRunner, 2000). 
Improving the academic success rate of groups has been shown to lead to better health, lower crime, increased political and civic involvement, and lower participation in social assistance among individuals in that group (Card, 2001). 
This study is concerned with the perceptions of Native students at a large commuter, open access university in the intermountain West and how they changed after efforts to improve the negative perceptions found in an earlier study. 
It is part of a series of studies nested within a large project. 
We provide an abbreviated report of the larger project here because that information is necessary to have a complete understanding of the results that we have achieved. 
The objective of the larger project is to increase Native American digital literacy and college readiness in the intermountain West. We were approved for funding from a National Science Foundation (NSF) for this purpose. 
Our specific goals under the grant were to recruit 650 individuals and facilitate the training or college course completion of 450 of them. 
Of the 450 individuals, 360 people would accomplish entry- level IT certifications and of the 360, 72 adults would find jobs during the grantfunding period. 
In addition, 90 individuals would accomplish higher level IT certifications including those in web-site development, networking, or security, business skill certifications, such as QuickBooks, or pass a college student success class for Native American students. 
Thirty people from this second group would either find jobs or stay enrolled in college. 
We purchased access to self-directed on-line training and certification and packages and developed two curricula for Native American students ourselves. 
Following the recommendations of Tippeconnic (2005), we networked with Native American faculty and staff members on campus and the faculty that taught courses in Native American Studies minor program. 
We learned from them as much as we could about our Native students and their tribal affiliations. 
We provided funds and leadership for activities and programs are featuring and honoring Native traditions and values and provided opportunities for mentoring, support and positive role modeling. 
We intended these programs to both attract Native Americans from outside our institution and to help address the need for role models for Native students (Brayboy and Castagno, 2011) even though the numbers of Native faculty and staff at our institution are low. 
We worked with Native student researchers to create partnerships with Native communities. 
We hired Natives to manage our recruiting and training operations. 
Eventually, our personal relationships developed into networks as the people who trusted us reached out to people who trusted them. 
We attracted both Native American students and their families and developed mentoring methods, group approaches, incentive, and job placement programs that were culturally appropriate and acceptable. 
During the two-year funding period of the grant we recruited more than 2200 people and provided them with training accounts. 
Almost 1700 of them have reached milestones in training with 751 achieving “high stakes” IT certifications and another 892 earning certificates generated by the training software in recognition of demonstrated expertise. 
Of those achieving “high stakes” certifications, 562 received entry-level IT certifications with 323 completing all three sections of the entry-level IT certificate protocol. 
Another 189 achieved an advanced IT or QuickBooks certification. 
Inside the university, we conducted two studies of Native American student perceptions, the second of which is reported here. 
We also reported on our efforts to improve those perceptions with a goal of improving recruitment and retention. 
We assumed that we needed to influence Native American groups in a variety of ways both inside and outside of our institution to accomplish this goal. HeavyRunner and DeCelles (2002: 30) note that when post-secondary institutions are able to create programs that bring family members on campus, the entire family develops a sense of belonging at the college and no longer feels resentful of the student spending time on campus. 
Establishing and maintaining a sense of “family”, both at home and at college, fortifies American Indian students’ academic persistence. 
HeavyRunner and DeCelles (2007) cite evidence in their article that American Indian students who are part of such programs are four times more likely to complete a fouryear degree at mainstream institutions than American Indian students who entered mainstream institutions as freshmen without being part of such a program. 
Significance of the study The researchers in this study are faculty members at a large, open-enrolment teaching university in the intern- mountain west which is surrounded by many Native American reservations and urban communities. 
Nonetheless, during the 2010 spring semester there were only 265 Native students enrolled at this institution (personal communication from the university’s Institutional Research Department). 
There are about 15,000 18 to 24 year Native Americans living within an eight hour drive of our university (estimate based on 2010 U.S. census data) and thus we believed this group to be greatly under-represented. 
This under-representation, as well as the economic health, and low levels of academic success of the overall group identified earlier make this study important. 
We thought that more academic success for Native American students at the post-secondary level would lead to more success in other areas for Native Americans as a group. 
We speculated that our status as an open-enrolment teaching university could play a key role in achieving social and economic justice for Native students and their communities since the poor academic preparation found to be characteristic of much of this group (Brayboy and Castagno, 2011) could make it difficult for individuals to matriculate to limited enrolment institutions. 
In addition, we hoped to position ourselves as being aware and understanding of the desire of many Native students to achieve an education for their community needs, not only for themselves, and to help these students understand how to “strategically accommodate” in learning how to fit into the university culture in order to achieve their educational objectives and thus, be in a position to serve their communities (Brayboy and Castagno, 2011: 16). 
Further, we planned to apply the lessons learned by Shotton et al. (2007) in empowering Native students to create a peer-mentoring retention program. 
Previous study In our study conducted during the spring of 2011 (Mosholder et al., 2013) we inquired about the perceptions of Native American students at our institution. 
We were intent on discovering “how indigenous students’ perceptions, values and worldviews might be different from those of the majority” (Brayboy and Castagno, 2011: 146). 
The Native students who responded to our survey and participated in our focus groups expressed needs that we set out to satisfy with new curricula and mentoring programs. 
To the extent possible, we attempted to be “culturally aware and prepared to use different methods than (we) use with white students (Tippeconnic, 2005: 50). 
Based on the results of that study, we developed a number of programs and additions that are subsequently described. 
The original review provided empirical data on a number of issues including program design, institutional philosophy, mentoring and student support, skill and identity development, curricula and pedagogy, and participation structure that needed to be evaluated for effective program development. 
The key elements that arose from that empirical study were used to develop the survey used both in this study (attached) as well as a study conducted one year prior to the study reported here (Mosholder et al., 2013). 
As with a study reporting qualitative interviews with 15 successful Native American college students (Jackson et al., 2007); many similarities surfaced between the literature review and the themes that emerged in the previous study concerning the conditions that need to be present for Native American students to be most successful in academia. 
They provided the researchers with clear direction upon which to develop and implement an action plan and a grant from National Science Foundation to provide the needed funding. 
Purpose of the study The current study had the purpose of evaluating the impact of these changes on Native American students. 
We used the same survey and focus group approach as we used in our first study, which was conducted one year prior to this study. 
Research questions The following research questions guided both studies: a) what are the perceptions of the Native American students in our institution about education and their institution and how do they compare to the perceptions of Native American students a year ago? 
and b) what has been the impact of curricula and programming to improve recruitment and retention of Native American students at our institution? 
We hoped these guiding questions will inform best practices for recruitment and retention of Native Americans at the college level. 
LITERATURE REVIEW A factor that was often identified in the literature associated with poor recruitment and retention success with Native American students at the post-secondary level was that of cultural incongruity (Mosholder and Goslin, 2013). 
Throughout our research we have sought to understand this factor in order to develop the most culturally sensitive curricula and programs. 
At the highest level of abstraction is the issue of worldview. 
From a Eurocentric viewpoint, individuals are of primary importance, man is given dominion over the world, and nature is evil. 
From a Native American perspective, groups are of primary importance, part of nature, and everything is both connected and sacred (Cajete, 1994). 
These worldviews lead to different philosophies of education, goals, and methods. 
Under the Eurocentric view, education is for individuals who are expected to contribute to society. 
Efficiency and cost effectiveness are important and education occurs separately from everyday life. 
The goals include making a common body of worthwhile knowledge, sound ideals, and important skills equally accessible to all students and to develop individuals who are skilled practitioners and good citizens. 
Skill development takes place separately from real life. 
Teachers decide what will be learned and when and commonly teach with a transmission perspective using lecture, recitation, and argumentative discourse. 
Students are expected to take part and learn publicly. 
True knowledge comes from empiricism, rationalism, and universalism. 
Educational organizations are hierarchical, teachers are credentialed professionals who instruct within a curricular framework and students are expected to develop on schedule (Stairs, 1988; Cajete, 1994; Lambe, 2003). 
Within the Native American view, educations, as well as achievement, are accomplished for the group, not the individual, designed to meet the practical needs of the group, and allow the individual to survive in nature as part of the group. 
Individual readiness to learn is important and education occurs within the fabric of everyday life. 
A personal relationship between the teacher and the student is important and they often are relatives. 
The goal is to facilitate the development of each individual within the social group and nature. 
Valid ways of knowing include opinions, personal experiences, practices or customs that come from culture, relationships, cosmology, and spirituality even if they are disparate or contradictory. 
Development takes place through participation in everyday life. 
Individual differences are understood and respected. 
People are thought to have unique gifts and each person comes to know their place within creation. 
It is not expected that everyone will be interested when teaching occurs and subjective interpretations are expected. 
No credentials are needed because everyone within the group understands who is qualified. 
Students practice in private and are only expected to demonstrate skills once they are perfected. 
There is no hierarchy (Stairs, 1988; Cajete, 1994; Lambe, 2003). 
Harrington and Harrington (2011: 4) observed that “(first) year programs are critical to the retention of American Indian students”. 
Shotten et al. (2007) studied a successful American Indian peer-mentoring programs and noted key elements related to success. 
These were the mentor’s commitment to, and care for, the program and the protégé, the mentor being seen by the protégés as admirable, and the mentor and protégé relating to one another. 
Shotten et al. (2007: 90, 95) also reported three key areas that peer mentors played a role “in helping American Indian students overcome potential barriers to their academic success”. 
These were facilitating connection to the community, support and guidance. 
Guidance included “developing goals, reconciling conflict, leadership and personal development”. 
Brayboy and Maughan (2009: 3, 5, 7, 8, 9) identified other elements that could be helpful in this regard, for example, showing how “university work translated to their (Indigenous student) home communities”(that) “their learning helps the entire community and how the curriculum relates to their everyday lives” (and that) they are “supported in recognizing the power of their own knowledge systems” as well as “the importance of bringing together forms of learning and knowing for the benefit of students and communities” . 
Further, indigenous students should be helped to understand that “Western and Indigenous knowledge can be in fact and must be configured in a way that is complimentary rather than contradictory and how predominantly non-indigenous educational spaces might come to value these knowledge’s as both worthy and useful”. 
Gilmore et al. (1997: 95) helped to clarify the challenge of facilitating success by their observation that “the institution views students as individuals (while Native American students are more likely to) view themselves as part of a connected web of family and community”. 
Brayboy and Castagno (2011: 141, 142) observed that many indigenous students need to learn “to navigate financial aid and scholarship information” and to “strategically accommodate or make adjustments and integrate where it makes sense for their longer term access and abilities to serve their communities”. 
These authors also point out that indigenous students often feel dissonance between their home environments and the culture of mainstream institutions and can benefit from a space “in which educators and their students might be exposed to broader notions of what teaching and learning are and can be”. 
They note that “Indigenous students tend to fare well in small group settings or in one-on-one encounters” (Brayboy and Castagno, 2011: 148). 
Program, event, and curricula development and sponsorship We made changes inside our university in response to the perceptions of the Native American students that we surveyed in ways recommended by the literature. 
In the program and event category, we are partnered with the university’s club for Native American students, the Native Sun Club, to develop and sponsor activities (Themes one and two) that attracted both the Native American students from the university and members of their communities and celebrated Native American culture. 
These included visits and presentations by Native Ameri- cans with national reputations such as an astronaut John Harrington and film makers, Chris Eyers and Travis Hamilton. 
We also held an elders and careers night, where we invited successful Native Americans from the area to talk about traditional teaching and learning as well as, their challenges and successes. 
We held a financial aid night and followed up to help Native American students apply for scholarships, grants, and loans. 
We sponsored a Native American basketball tournament and helped sponsor two powwows at the university. 
Further, we sponsored the second Native American Job Fair to be held in the United States. 
On the academic side of the university, we created courses and programs that allowed us to take direct action on themes three through five. 
One change was the development of two curricula for Native students. 
The first was a learning and motivation strategies curriculum with an embedded Native Student Mentoring Program, University Success Studies for Native American Students (Course 1). It was designed to address a number of potential obstacles encountered by many Native students including the need for study skill development, knowledge related to success in post-secondary education, support, guidance, and lack of exposure to appropriate role models. 
The second curriculum developed was called Indigenous Learning Traditions (Course 2). It helped demonstrate that Native American traditions and values were honored at our university and some of the challenges of cultural incongruity (Mosholder and Goslin, 2013). 
Course 1 We created this course to provide an effective first year experience for our Native American students. 
We developed lessons to address the skill and knowledge development needs identified in the literature and our survey and patterned our mentoring program after the one reported in Shotten, et al. (2007) to facilitate connection to the community, support and guidance. 
We started each class with a blessing by a Native spiritual adviser. 
It was a hybrid class with most of the lecture and all of the assignments were on line. 
Every Friday was a group work day where we met in a computer laboratory and students worked in self formed groups to discuss the assignments and the answers. 
Topic areas included study skills, academic and career planning, major selection, institutional resources, assertiveness, and conflict resolution. 
To the extent possible, the lessons were experiential and used small group and one-on-one exercises and encounters. 
We involved Native Americans as presenters and participants wherever possible. 
These included presentations by Native students who were very successful in obtaining scholarships. 
We have an “Ask a Native Educator” on-line discussion where students would ask about the concerns they had in navigating school or home life. 
We had a “Stay in School” on-line discussion where students shared insights about barriers and how to overcome them. 
We had a session on typical areas of conflict with students, reviewed conflict resolution styles and role-played using these styles to deal with conflict. 
We discussed expected behavior both in home situations and in mainstream educational situations to aid in their understanding of how to strategically accommodate the cultural challenges that the students encounter. 
Mentors were frequently in touch with the students to help them remember due dates. 
They explore student needs and provide explanations on course and institutional requirements. 
They also provided help with educating parents and elders about the nature of the commitment necessary for Native American student success. 
In addition, mentors organize groups of students to attend events with them. 
We invited Native educators and elders to be presenters. 
We held three pots lucks a semester which were attended by non-student Natives who served as role models for students. 
We conducted three talking circles a semester to assess what was being learned that were led by Natives who were not class members including older students, staff, faculty or elders who were relatives of students in the class. 
Course 2 This course was designed to address the dissonance experienced by Native students between their home environment and mainstream school culture identified in the literature (Gilmore et al., 1997; Brayboy and Maughan, 2009; Brayboy and Castagno, 2011). 
Our hope was that better understanding would result in better preparation to deal with the challenges that they might experience. 
The class also provided an opportunity to present the many positive aspects and contributions of indigenous cultures of which Native American students often are not aware of even though they are keenly aware of the negative representations. 
Our approach was to provide a broad overview of the similarities of and differences between Indigenous and European-American world views and educational philosophies. 
The course used a seminar format and problem based learning to focus on both the current challenges of Native American communities and to explore the similarities and differences of traditional teaching and learning to those of modern American education. 
After comparing and contrasting worldviews and educational philosophies, we explored pedagogy. 
We looked at each broad subject area of the typical liberal arts curriculum and attempted to reconstruct how and why that area might be taught in an indigenous culture. 
Students took turns presenting lessons in each of these areas taught in the traditional mainstream classroom and then, aided by opinions and essays from Native scholars, we attempted to construct the indigenous equivalent. 
METHODS Qualitative methods were chosen for this and the previous study (Mosholder et al., 2013). 
The rational for this choice is presented there as the details of the development of our survey and the instrument itself. 
The survey questions are embedded in the results and discussion sections. 
The questions were designed using grounded theory to generate Native American student perceptions of their views and experiences as they related to the key elements affecting recruitment and retention that were found in the literature review. 
The same four undergraduate students from within the larger population recruited as Native American Student Researchers (NASRs) and given training in survey data collection procedures were used in this study. 
The data collection procedure was the same as well. 
The NASRs were tasked with having as many of the 311 students enrolled in the university during spring semester of 2012 identifying themselves as American Indians or Alaska Natives at our university as possible complete the instrument. 
Sixty three students did. 
Each of the three researchers hand coded the data checking for emergent themes using an open coding line by line analysis. 
In addition, the NSRSs were asked to follow the same process as a way of evaluating the accuracy of the researchers’ interpretations within the appropriate cultural context. 
The emergent themes were used to form focus group questions. 
These are included as Attachment A. The NSRSs were asked to contact as many of the unsurveyed Native American students as possible by telephone and e-mail to ask them to participate in focus groups. 
Two focus groups were conducted, both with eight students. 
The students completed an informed consent waiver prior to the start of the session. 
Two of the researchers took field notes and the sessions were recorded by one of the researchers and transcribed by one of NSRSs. 
These were hand coded by the researchers and the NSRSs checking for emergent themes using an open coding line by line analysis. 
All of the data were then compared and analyzed independently by each of the faculty researchers and the NASRs who searched for themes across the data sets. 
Five themes emerged related to the retention of Native American students at the subject university. 
RESULTS We have organized our results. 
This section is organized by emergent theme. 
Student comments are quoted to validate points or positions made. 
Student surveys are assigned a number from 1 to 63, for example, S5, and students within the two focus groups are assigned a number, for example, F1S3 or F2S8. 
Theme one: College education is important (challenging, rewarding) and supported by parents The first question on the survey was “What is your view of a college education? 
Does your family support this view or disagree?” Each of the 63 students surveyed responded that education was important and that their parents thought so too. 
This response was markedly different as compared to the responses from students asked the same question in the prior study where it was reported by participants that parents and elders felt it more important to be at home and community than to attend the university. 
We explored this difference with the students in the two focus groups. 
Several students had comments. 
For example FG2S2 – “My mom encouraged me, but did not press”. 
The issue for this student was not whether a formal education was worthwhile, but whether he wanted to put forth the effort. 
As far as support goes, FG2S2 was of the opinion that the older a Native American was, the more likely that they would discourage their children from getting a formal education. 
One way that friends and relatives actively discourage others from pursuing a formal education is by accusing them of being a “white wannabe” or thinking that they “are acting better than them”. 
Both FG2S2 and FG2S3 said, “I do not care, I want college for myself”. 
Survey questions three and four where about choices of majors “Have you picked a major or thought about what it might be? 
If so, what is it? 
What would you like to do once you have finished your degree program?” and “What subjects and academic areas are seen by the tribal elders and other community leaders as being important to tribal growth?” Students identified majors that they thought would be important to elders (Business, Mathematics, Science, English, Law, and Engineering) but they apparently picked their own major based on individual interest for example, nursing, sports medicine and exercise science). 
There was no evidence that students let the preference of elders influence their decision. 
There was, however, evidence of the opposite. 
FG2S6, for example, stated “I do not think about that (that is, what major the elders would like students to choose) actually. 
I just thought of what I wanted to do.” Theme two: Almost all of the students felt they fit in at the university The fourth question in the survey was “Have you, or anyone that you know experienced feelings of not fitting in or of isolation at (university)? 
If the answer is yes, what caused these feelings and did they affect the desire to continue at (university)?” Of the 63 students surveyed, 41 responded “no” to the first part of this question. 
S17 said “Yes, I have heard other students express being home sick and not fitting in”. 
Of those that answered yes, only four were unable to identify aspects of the university that made them feel like they belonged in answer to question five. 
These responses and themes were dramatically different from the responses and themes from the research conducted during the prior study when theme two was “The Native student community is fragmented. 
Natives do not know or interact with many other Native students” and theme three was “Native Americans should be mentoring other Native American students, but that is not happening”. 
To better understand this we explored this difference in the focus groups. 
FG1S6 commented that “I think it is because of the activities. 
At least for me, I felt more part of something”. 
FG2S8 stated: ‘Students have felt more a part of things this year’. 
Natives are choosing (university) because of the things going on. There is an overwhelming sense of fitting in. Natives are talking to other Natives and want to be friends with them. 
Similarly, FG2S2 observed that it was “easier to fit in because there are more of us” (here at university) even though, his perception did not match the reality. 
FG1S1 summed up the new character of the culture when he said: But it has, this stuff, like everybody’s talking about: Native Sun, Multicultural, stuff like that. 
That has made me feel more comfortable here, because when I first came here I would go back to the rez every other week, then, it would become every few weeks and next, once a month. 
That is what meeting new friends did. 
Theme three: Organizations and programs that help Native American students feel like they fit in, they belong, and give them strength Question five from the survey was “Have you experienced aspects of (university) that make you feel like you belong? 
If the answer was yes, we asked “what were they, and how did they affect your desire to continue at (university)?” The most common responses were the Multicultural Center: S4 “Yes, first in the Multicultural Center” and S12 said, “I feel a good sense of belonging when I am surrounded by other Native people. 
I like being in the Multicultural center”; the Native Sun Club S12 (continuing from the previous statement “of going to the Native Sun club”; dancing in or watching the Legacy Group S6 “school activities like participating in the Legacy Dance Group”; University Success Studies for Native Students (CLSS 1000), S10 said “I recently took CLSS 1000. 
It really helped me know that I have more of my kind here than I thought.” The focus groups added some nuanced feelings about these resources. 
For example, several students in first focus group expressed ambivalence about the Multicultural Center. 
FG1S5 stated: “we are getting pushed out (of) the Multicultural Center (by the) Polynesians. 
“Lumping the minority students together is not good; Native students should have their own space.”He pointed out that there are artifacts from other cultures, but “no pictures of Native Americans.”FG1S1 said “I liked it when I first came. 
I have haven’t been here for probably two years. 
But I liked it. That’s the only thing that kept me coming.”The remarks in focus group two were a lot more supportive of the MultiCultural Center. 
For example FG2S9 said: ”coming to the Multicultural Center, I felt like I was back home.” One puzzling observation was that many of the events and activities that were held at the university for Native American students were not particularly well attended. 
Despite this, a large number of students responded on the survey that more activities for Native Americans would be one way to increase success rates. 
We explored this dichotomy in the focus groups.FG1S2 said that she did not attend because she was “busy half the time and I did not know about the event the other half”. 
FG2S5 said “A lot of Native Americans are shy, they are shut in. They are shy and want to stay home”. 
FG1S2 commented about being clear as to who is invited to things. 
“We do not know if we just come alone or can we bring our families?” FG1S4 said the communicator “needs to be brown” not white, and that the invitation “must be personal.” FG1S1 said that “texts from someone they know would be the best”, but not Facebook, because Facebook is not personal.” There was a consensus among the members of this groups that we should tap into the already existing communication networks that Native Americans have by finding influential people and have them invite others. 
Several students who responded to surveys suggested activities that bring White and Native American students together would be a good way to encourage recruitment and retention of Native American students. 
For example, S43 wrote “have more classes with both Native students and white students to gain a different perspective on both cultures”, and S32 wrote “offer activities that can be combined with other clubs, so that each group is exposed to different cultures.”The focus group students agreed with this and the sentiment may reflect a lack of cultural insecurity. 
One student, FG2S9, however, stated that he “just does not feel comfortable around just white people.” Theme four: Additional activities and events that would help recruitment and retention Questions seven, eight, and nine of the survey were related to this theme and are: 1. What would be the best way to help Native students understand all of the resources available to them, including the full range of financial aid, and to encourage the students to use them? 
2. What could be done, both here at university and in your home communities, to change the way that Native students transition into the (university) community so that they would be most likely achieve a successful outcome? 
3. What would be the best way to help new Native students understand the expectations of university both in traditional and distance education classes? 
There was no shortage of ideas about what additional activities and events we might sponsor. 
These included a dedicated financial aid adviser and an orientation program to help students learn about expectations and resources. 
SS32 wrote”the university needs a financial aid person that specializes in Native students”. 
SS1 wrote “I think Native freshmen and transfer students should participate in a new student orientation program familiarizing them with the expectations of college life” and SS25 wrote “Have a summer conference focused primarily on Natives” FG1S1 and FG1S3 also mentioned an orientation for all Native American students sponsored by the Native Sun Club. 
Other suggestions included “more motivational speakers to urge success for Natives” by SS23 and “more classes focusing on Native language and culture” by S9 and S17. 
S49 wrote ‘Keep CLSS 1000 (University Success Studies for Native Students) and other Native classes available’. 
This class has been a good place to meet other Native students. 
If are open to all, will help strengthen cultural ties. 
An idea that came up both in the surveys and the focus groups was that of sending (university) students to high schools on the reservations to serve as mentors and role models. 
They would talk about university and what it is like; what life is like without a college education; the benefits of a college education; and the scholarships available. 
As FG1S4 said “I would tell them, I am going to graduate next year, and I am going to show you guys how to do it”. 
FG1S2 added that many 16 to 18 year old kids have a desire, but since they are coming from a background where they do not have exposure of how to do it they kind of just give up. And so, I think if you physically go there and say this is what our school is about, this is what we do; let me walk you through this process. 
This is how you sign up for classes and register for school; get your scholarships and where you can live. 
FG2S2 said “I think it would inspire a lot of youth to get a higher education if we go back and visit them.” FG2S1 said “I definitely want to be involved in that”. 
Everyone in the focus groups appeared to think this was a good idea. 
FG1S4 cautioned against making the purpose of the trips performances, an apparent reference to the Legacy dance groups that serve as cultural ambassadors. 
It should be involvement with the high school students. 
Other ideas that came out of the focus groups included a buddy system (FG1S5), that is, pairing experienced Native students with new comers and a summer bridge for Natives HS juniors and seniors (FG1S2). 
One student (FG2S2) suggested an organization where high school students would be taught leadership, mentoring, and tutoring skills for the purpose of helping elementary school students. 
Theme five: Distance education and its potential to make a difference with Native American students, particularly those on reservations Question 11 in the survey was “Do you have a computer at home, an internet connection, and a cell phone? 
Do the members of your extended family and friends have access to these resources?” Question 13 in the survey was: Have you taken an on-line course before? 
If yes, what was it and did you like it? 
Why or why not? 
What would be the key elements of a successful on-line peer mentoring program that might help students stay motivated to completing an on-line course? 
Almost all of the students who responded to the survey have access to computers and the internet at home or with them here. 
So do their families. 
Only a few students took on-line courses. 
Two said they liked taking on-line classes because of the flexibility afforded particularly when working full time. 
The rest did not like learning this way, but if they took a course on-line they would like a mentor to encourage them to make deadlines and finish their work. 
Several stated that they learn better face-to-face. 
For example FG1S5 said: I find myself wanting to have the classroom experience. 
The computer thing I think it is cool, but I am old fashioned straight from the rez. 
It has to be hands on. If there is a lack of instructions I lose interest quickly but if you had someone physically in the room monitoring, yeah, I think it would be huge. 
Similarly, FG1S7 said: ‘I would like it if there were some part of it where there was a lecture where the teacher and students participated in a Skype type of conversation where you actually get to see them live and ask questions, not just all on-line or all on paper’. 
That would work for me. Quantitative observations not associated with the qualitative study There were 68 students who enrolled in four sections of University Success Studies for Native Students. 
Of these, 63 completed the class with a grade of “C” or better. 
Evaluations conducted on the curriculum demonstrated noticeable improvement in all 23 items on the assessment instrument used to measure the effects of the standard University Success Studies curriculum. 
All thirteen students who enrolled in the section of Indigenous Learning Traditions completed the class with a grade of “C” or better. 
All scored their level of efficacy as higher after the course than before the course on each of the eight learning objectives. 
Another metric of our success is the size and resilience of the Native American student population at our institution where the enrolment and retention rates of Native students increased by promising amounts. 
There were 265 Native students out of 22,618 total students enrolled at our institution during the spring of 2009 before we began our project. 
There were 318 Native American students out of 26, 170 students enrolled there in the spring of 2013. 
Fallto-spring retention was 67% for the 2008 to 2009 school, and increased in each of the three subsequent school years reaching 77% in 2012 to 2013. 
Fall to spring retention for all students was 64% for the 2008 to 2009 school year and 61% during the 2012 to 2013 school year (personal communication from the university’s Institutional Research Department). 
DISCUSSION Our first research question is “What are the perceptions of the Native American students in our institution about education and their institution and how do they compare to the perceptions of Native American students a year ago?” Almost all of the students who completed our survey or attended one of our focus groups felt they were accepted at the university and thought that almost all of their friends did too. 
This was noticeably different from a year earlier. 
This improvement occurred at the same time as our improvement efforts. 
The Native community was fragmented during the earlier research but was apparently much more cohesive when our latest survey was conducted. 
Organizations and curricula that helped Native students feel like they belonged included the Multicultural Center, the Native Sun Club, Legacy Group, and University Success Studies for Native Students. 
These results are consistent with the findings of Jackson et al. (2003) which suggested that organizations providing social support help Native students be successful. 
Students expressed a desire for more activities, but apparently, the awareness level about the ones that were held was not as high as it should be. Publicity needs to be improved, since the methods we have been using (e-mails to the list of Native students, posters, FaceBook postings, newspaper and radio spots) are not adequate. 
The students suggested that we tap into the network of existing relationships by having influential individuals deliver personal invitations. 
The group that we surveyed for this article perceived their parents and elders to be understanding about the demands of post-secondary education. 
The group that we surveyed and talked to a year earlier had a much different perception, that is, their parents and elders did not understand the demands and wanted their children to come home to help despite what college might demand. 
The group surveyed for this article thought that the difference might be a generational issue with older Native Americans being more likely to discourage formal education than younger Native Americans. 
Students in the group surveyed for this article picked their majors based on personal interest more than on the preferences of elders or other community leaders. 
They were evenly divided about the idea of returning to, or living on, the reservation after graduation. 
While some expressed interest in going back so that they could learn the language of their people or have their children learn the traditions and values of their tribe, there was also concern about the lack of quality economic and educational opportunities there. 
The study by Jackson et al. (2003) identified similar themes among successful Native American students. 
Additional activities that would help recruitment and retention included more Native role models as motivational speakers, an orientation for new Native students, more classes for Native students, particularly language and culture classes, sending university students to high schools with lots of Natives to influence them in productive directions, and a buddy system pairing older Native students with new Native students. 
The second research question was “what has been the impact of curricula and programming to improve recruitment and retention of Native American students at our institution?” There has been a noteworthy improvement in recruitment, with the Native student population increasing from 265 to 318, an increase of 20% as well as fall to spring retention, which increased from 67 to 77% during the same period. 
It is possible that the combination of activities, events, and curricula was the main driver behind this change. 
Our free IT training program gave us great penetration into Native American communities as well as, into communities of other underserved groups. 
Of the 75 people who received compensation from the grant, only four were white, with the others being Natives, Latinos and/or Pacific Islanders. 
We publicized the many events that we staged, and even though attendance was often lower than we hoped, there was still an increase in good will that would likely make the university more attractive to Natives. 
Support for these activities also helped to make for a much more vibrant Native Sun Club with more members and more willing participants. 
This is likely to have had a positive impact as well. 
Finally, the curricula that we developed, particularly University Success Studies for Native Students have apparently played a role in developing a sense of acceptance and community as well as, hopefully, teaching skill sets important for post-secondary success. 
Our attempts to develop a Native student mentoring program were embedded within this course. 
Although, the program may have played a part in facilitating some of the changes observed, the students questioned through surveys and focus groups did not specifically note its effects. 
Thus, though, we attempted to duplicate the criteria for success- ful programs reported in Shotten et al. (2007), we did not seem to duplicate their levels of successes. 
This may be because the Shotten et al. (2007) program was student initiated and focused on one-on-one relationships while our program was faculty initiated with mentoring activities directed towards sub-groups with classes. 
Similarly, our attempts to duplicate the goals of HeavyRunner and DeCelles (2007: 30) can be viewed as being partly successful. 
We did “create programs that brought family members on campus and the parents of the group questioned through surveys and focus groups were reported to be less “resentful of the student(s) spending time on campus” but we have no evidence that there was a nexus between programs and attitudes. 
Our fall to spring retention percentage is up from 67 to 77%, but the effect on persistence to graduation remains to be seen. 
LIMITATIONS A more nuanced perspective of the perceptions of the Native students in the study would have been gained if the data had been disaggregated by, for example, gender, tribal affiliation, first generation students, stage in school (freshman, etc), or urban/rural. In addition, we are aware that we were only able to speak with a faction of the Native American population at our campus. 
It would greatly help our data if we were able to contact and discuss these issues with a wider variety of Native American students. 
More effort in this endeavor is needed for future research. 
IMPLICATIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH Our research uncovered a noticeable improvement in the perceptions of Native students at our institution about their feelings of belonging, opportunities for involvement, and beliefs about the acceptance level of Native American traditions and values. 
There has also been a noticeable increase in recruiting and retention statistics. 
Future research should attempt to establish statistically significant evidence of the correlates or causes of recruitment and retention trends. 
In addition, other interventions should be evaluated for their impact. 
Winters (2012) suggest an orientation for new Native students including a program where students from the recruiting institution visit high schools students at their current school. 
Another approach recommended by Austin (2005) and Lee et al. (2011) would be to invite tribal elders, parents and other family members to round table discussions to discuss matters that affect Native students. 
Additionally, Tippeconnic Fox (2005: 56, 57) poses a number of questions about faculty and staff on campus. 
These include: - Do the interactions between Native American staff or faculty and Native American students in majority higher education affect academic success? 
- What best practices exist for collaborative efforts between Native American and non-Native staff and faculty to support the success of Native American students? 
- What impact does the Native American studies program have on recruitment, retention, and graduation of Native American students and on their selection of a major or minor? 
- What impact does having Native American viewpoints and contributions integrated into the curriculum throughout the disciplines, not just in Native American studies, have on the academic success of Native American students and on the learning of all students? 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT The authors are grateful to the National Science Foundation for support rendered in the course of this research. 
REFERENCES Brayboy BMJ, Castagno AE (2011). 
Indigenous millennial students in higher education. 
In F. A. Bonner II, A. F. Marbley, & M. F. HowardHamilton (Eds.), Diverse millennial students in college: Implications for faculty and student affairs (pp. 
137-155). 
Sterling, VA: Stylus. 
Brayboy B, Maughan E (2009). 
Indigenous knowledge and the story of the bean. 
Harvard Edu. 
Rev. 
79(1):1-21. 
Cajete G (1994). 
Look to the mountain: An ecology of indigenous education. 
Kivaki’ Press: Skylan, NC Card D (2011). 
Estimating the return to schooling: Progress on some persistent econometric problems. 
Econometrica, 69(5): 1127-1160. 
Harrington CF, Harrington BG (2011). 
Fighting a different battle: Challenges facing American Indians in higher education. 
J. Indigenous Res. 
1(1)4. 
Heavyrunner I, DeCelles R (2002). 
Family education model: Meeting the student retention challenge. 
J. Am. Indian Edu. 
41(2):29-37. 
Jackson AP, Smith SA, Hill CL (2003). 
Academic persistence among Native American college students. 
J. College Student Dev. 
44:548-565. 
Lambe J (2003). 
Indigenous education, mainstream education, and Native studies: Some considerations when incorporating indigenous pedagogy into Native studies. 
The Am. Indian Quart. 
27(1&2):308-324. 
Lee J, Donlan W, Brown EF (2011). 
American Indian/Alaskan Native undergraduate retention at predominantly White institutions: An elaboration of Tinto's theory of college student departure. 
J. College Student Retention: Res. 
Theory Pract. 
12(3):257-276 Mosholder R, Goslin C (2013). 
Native American college student persistence. 
J. College Student Retention: Res. 
Theory Pract. 
15(3). 
Mosholder R, Waite, B, Goslin C (2013). 
Negotiating understanding: Considering Native American attitudes about higher education in a Eurocentric context. 
Acad. 
J. Edu. 
Res. 
1(5):085-096. 
Ortiz A, Heavyrunner I (2003). 
Student access, retention, and success: Models of inclusion and support. 
In M. K. P. Ah Nee-Benham & W. Stein (Eds.). 
The renaissance of American Indian higher education: Capturing the dream. 
(pp.215-240) Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Shotton H, Oosahwe E, Cintron R (2007). 
Stories of success: Experiences of American Indian students in a peer-mentoring retention program. 
Rev. 
Higher Edu. 
31(1):81-107. 
Stairs A (1988). 
Beyond cultural inclusion. 
In: Minority education: From shame to struggle, T Skutnabb-Kangas and J. Cummins (Eds.), (pp. 
308327) Multilingual Matters Ltd: Clevedon, UK. Tierney WG (1992). 
Official encouragement, unofficial discouragement: Minorities in academe: The Native American experience. 
Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 
Tippeconnic FM (2005). 
Voices from within: Native American faculty and staff on campus. 
New Directions for Student Services. 
(109):49-59. 
Winters, N. C. (2012). 
From the reservation: A theory regarding the development of Native American students. 
J. Indiana Univ. 
Stud. 
Personnel Assoc. 
pp.27-36. Cite this article as: Mosholder R, Waite R, Goslin C (2003). 
Examining Native American recruitment and retention in higher education. 
Acad. 
J. Edu. 
Res. 
1(5): 072-082. 
Submit your manuscript at: http://academiapublishing.org/ajer/index.htm Academia Journal of Educational Research; Mosholder et al. 083 Appendix A – Introduction to the focus groups and the focus group questions I think it’s appropriate to frame what we are doing here. 
For those of you that don’t know, the (Student Success Studies) department and I have been recipients of a National Science Foundation grant; the purpose of the grant is to improve digital literacy and college readiness among Native Americans. 
As part of that we are trying to improve the persistence and retention and recruitment of Native Americans here at UVU (Utah Valley University). 
We did a literature review, it’s been 3 years now since we did the literature review, looked at what all the Native authors have said about why Native students are successful or not successful in post-secondary education, and based on that lit review we put together a survey and had (Native student researchers) survey other Native students in the spring of 2011 and then conducted focus groups like this one. 
From those sources, we heard about a number of opportunities to make improvements like facilitating mentoring of Natives by Natives, holding events to invite the Native community in and developing curricula to address student needs. 
Based on what we heard last year and the research of a lot of Native scholars we have tried to change the culture of the university. 
We made some changes in University Success Studies for Native Students that a number of you have taken and by improving the Native Student Mentoring Program. 
We added Indigenous Learning Traditions which a number of you have also taken. 
We’ve held a lot of event, like bringing in Native filmmakers Chris Eyreand Travis Hamilton, bringing in Commander John Harrington who was the first native astronaut, we have had elder nights, and (two Native student researchers) are putting on a basketball tournament and we’ve helped sponsor the UVU Powwow. 
The overall intent is to demonstrate that we appreciate Native traditions and values and that we are interested in having you guys go to school here. 
This spring (2012) (four Native student researchers) conducted the same survey and talked with 63 Native students. 
Two different groups (a group of Native student researchers and a group of faculty researchers) coded the surveys which means reading them to find common emergent themes. 
We’re holding this focus group and another just like it consisting of Native students who didn’t fill out the survey to run those themes buy you to see what you think of them. 
That way we have a third opinion and can make sure that what we think we see and hear is really what’s there. 
In qualitative research, that’s called triangulation since we have had 3 different groups look at the results of the surveys. 
Does anyone have any questions? 
1. OK, so one of the things that is interesting about this semester’s group of survey respondents as compared to the survey respondents last spring was that this group had much more positive attitudes. 
As with last year almost all the students think that a college education is important. 
Last year most students didn’t think that their parents understood what it took to be successful at a university like this and so if there was a crisis at home they expected them to drop everything and come home and work on that crisis. 
One of the things that last year’s group of students requested was a way that we could help them describe what it took to go to school here so that their parents would be more understanding when that situation arose. 
None of the students in this group identified that as a problem. 
Anybody have any thoughts about that? 
Why this group might be different? 
Are we looking at two different groups? 
2. One of the themes that came out of the literature in the past is this idea that education is the enemy, assimilation forced in the past and the parents would be worried about sending their kids to school like this because the school would try to turn them into white people and they wouldn’t come back. 
Is that something that people run into these days? 
3. One of the things that was interesting about the group this spring, your group, is that almost everybody, out of 63 people 57 people felt like they fit in and didn’t know anyone that didn’t. 
There were six people that said they knew other people that had the problem of not fitting in, but each went on to say that it was up to those who felt this way to figure how to fit in. Everybody, expect for one person, said that there where organizations and activities that helped them feel like they belong, that was the multicultural center, or the legacy group, or the Native Sun Club, or the classes that I teach, University Success for Native Students or Indigenous Learning Traditions. 
What do you think about that? 
Why do think there is this dramatic difference compared to the group we talked to a year ago that overwhelmingly felt like outsiders and your group in terms of feeling as though they are accepted here. 
What do you think has happened that might have changed that attitude or are we looking at two different groups? 
4. One of the things that the group last year said was that the Native group is more fragmented. 
That people don’t know one another, they don’t talk to each other. 
That seems to have changed somewhat. 
Do you guys talk to each other? 
5. One of the themes, in terms of the value of education, a majority of students expressed an interest of getting an education and going back to the reservations and help. 
How often do you think this happens? 
Do people go back to the rez and help? 
Academia Journal of Educational Research; Mosholder et al. 084 6. There was a question on the survey asking respondents to speculate which majors tribal elders and community leaders would prefer students go into. 
Is this something you think about when considering what to study? 
7. Another question on the survey was about distance education classes. 
These have great potential for people who have difficulty getting to campus or to fill out someone’s schedule conveniently. 
Yet the group survey overwhelmingly said that they are willing to take that approach. 
Out of the 63 people surveyed there were five that said that they were successful in distance education courses. 
What do you think of this? 
8. A related theme was a suggestion about helping high school students back on the rez and the other home communities. 
A number of the respondents to the surveys talked about groups of (this university) students going back and helping these students make the right decisions. 
Would any of you be interested in doing something like that? 
9. Another theme concerned helping people understand their cultures. 
A lot of people were interested in seeing more Native classes, particularly Native language classes. 
In particular Navajo, I would guess half of the Native American group is Navajo. 
So Navajo would probably be the most popular language. 
Would there be a need for that, even though it would be a non-credit class? 
10. Many respondents to the survey observed that students don’t always understand the resources that are here to help them out. 
How can we better inform them of what is there so that when they need it they know what to do and know where to go? 
11. One of the things that people mentioned on the survey is a desire for more events, some more fun activities to help building community here. 
There were suggestions about having financial aid classes. 
Part of what I was wondering was what we were missing, because the (student researchers) and I have put on a lot of events that people have not been well attended. 
Any comment on that? 
12. I want to revisit one question. 
We did this same survey last year and there are some major differences from last year’s group and this year. 
The group last year didn’t feel accepted, but this year, this group is feeling more accepted. 
They feel there is some groups that makes them feel accepted like the multi-cultural group, or Legacy or the Native Sun club or my class. 
Last year people said how fragmented the Native Community was and the Native Students didn’t talk to each other. 
I don’t see evidence of that this time around. 
What do you think that means? 
Do you think that means anything? 
Or is it just the way people were feeling this spring vs. last spring? 
13. Is there something that stands out about (our institution) and the experience that Native students have here that we haven’t mentioned? 