Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at . 
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. 
We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. 
For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org. 
International Reading Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Reading Research Quarterly. 
Does text structure/summarization instruction facilitate learning from expository text? 
BONNIE B. ARMBRUSTER THOMAS H. ANDERSON JOYCE OSTERTAG University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign FIFTH-GRADE STUDENTS were instructed in a particular text structure to see whether it would improve their ability to learn from similarly structured social studies material. Eighty-two fifth-grade students were assigned either to a structure training group, which received direct instruction in recognizing and summarizing a conventional text structure (problem/solution), or to a traditional training group, which read and discussed answers to questions about social studies passages. 
As measured by responses to a main-idea essay question and by written summaries of two passages, students' ability to abstract the macrostructure of problem/solu- tion text read independently was improved by the structure training. 
Est-ce qu'enseigner a' rdsumer/structurer un textefacilite l'apprentissage a partir de l'exposd ? 
UNE CERTAINE structure de texte a 6t6 enseign6e a des 61eves de cinquieme annee afin de savoir si cela pouvait ameliorer leur apprentissage du materiel de sciences humaines pr6sen- tant une structure semblable. 
On a soumis 82 61eves de cinquieme ann6e ' l'un de ces groupes: soit un groupe d'enseignement de la structure, b6n6ficiant de l'enseignement direct d'une structure de texte conventionnelle (probleme/solution), soit un groupe d'enseignement traditionnel dans lequel on lisait puis discutait des r6ponses aux questions pos6es sur des passages de sciences humaines. 
Tel qu'evalude par les r6ponses a une question ' d6veloppe- ment portant sur l'id6e principale et par les r6sum6s 6crits de deux passages, la capacit6 des l6eves pour r6sumer la macrostructure d'un texte ' probleme/solution lu de faqon ind6pen- dante 6tait augment6e chez ceux ayant b6neficie de l'enseignement de la structure. 
SLa instrucci6n para estructuraci6n/resumen de texto facilita el aprendizaje de texto expositorio ? 
SE INSTRUYO a estudiantes de quinto grado en una estructura de texto particular para ver si 6sta ayudaba a mejorar su habilidad de aprender de materiales de ciencias sociales estructura- dos de forma similar. 
Se asign6 a 82 estudiantes de quinto grado o a un grupo de entrena- miento de estructura que recibi6 instrucci6n directa en una estructura de texto convencional (problema/soluci6n) o a un grupo de entrenamiento tradicional que discuti6 respuestas a pre- guntas sobre pasajes de ciencias sociales. 
De acuerdo a las respuestas medidas por un ensayo de preguntas de la idea principal y por restimenes escritos de dos pasajes, la habilidad de los estudiantes de abstraer la macroestructura de texto de problema/soluci6n lefdo independiente- mente mejor6 con el entrenamiento de estructura. 
331 Can Textstruktur/Zusammenfassungslehre das Erlernen von erliuternden Texten erleichtern ? 
FUNFKLASSLER WURDEN angehalten, an einer bestimmten Textstruktur festzustellen, ob diese ihre FRhigkeit, von ihnlich aufgebautem Sozialstudien-Material zu lernen, verbessern wiirde. 
Zweiundachtzig Schiuler im flinften Schuljahr wurden entweder einer Strukturlehre- Gruppe zugeteilt, welche direkte Instruktionen durch konventionelle Textstruktur erhielt (Problem/L6sung) oder aber einer tradionellen Unterrichtsgruppe, welche Antworten las und diskutierte fiber Fragen mit Bezug auf Sozialstudien-Abschnitte. 
Gemessen an den Reak- tionen auf eine Hauptidee Aufsatzfrage und an den schriftlichen Zusammenfassungen von zwei Abschnitten, die Fihigkeit der Schdiler, die Makrostruktur unabhdingig vom gelesenen Problem/Ldsungstext zu abstrahieren, erwies sich als verbessert durch Strukturlehre. 
Most learning from reading, both in and out of school, depends on the ability to read and understand expository text. 
Although the em- pirical evidence is weak, experts contend that children generally have more difficulty reading expository than narrative text (Spiro & Taylor, 1980). 
Many factors may contribute to chil- dren's difficulty with expository text, including insufficient prior knowledge, lack of interest, and lack of motivation. 
As suggested by recent research in learning from reading, another con- tributing factor may be that children lack sensi- tivity to text structure-to the way the ideas in text are organized. 
Our focus in this study was to explore the effect of text structure instruction on middle-grade children's ability to learn from reading expository text. 
Many current theories of reading compre- hension assume, at least implicitly, that skilled readers automatically abstract a higher-order structure of text (Meyer, 1975; Rumelhart & Ortony, 1977; van Dijk & Kintsch, 1983). 
This macrostructure (van Dijk & Kintsch, 1983) represents the gist of a text organized into a co- herent whole. 
The macrostructure guides en- coding, recall, and reproduction of the essential points of the text. 
Formation of macrostructures is thus a prerequisite for success in tasks involv- ing global comprehension and meaningful learning. 
Middle-grade children apparently have dif- ficulty forming macrostructures for expository text. 
For example, several researchers have shown that children in the middle grades have difficulty producing written summaries of ex- pository text (Brown & Day, 1983; Taylor, 1986; Winograd, 1984). 
These children may have difficulty forming macrostructures be- cause they have trouble identifying important information or finding the main idea in exposi- tory text. 
Indeed, in the Winograd (1984) and Taylor (1986) studies, ability to identify impor- tant information was significantly related to ability to summarize text. 
Other research on learning from expository text has demonstrated that sensitivity to the or- ganization of ideas in text - and hence to the rel- ative importance of information-is related to comprehension and memory. 
For example, in several recent studies, researchers have exam- ined the effect of readers' awareness of the au- thor's text structure on their ability to recall expository text (McGee, 1982; Meyer, Brandt, & Bluth, 1980; Taylor, 1980, 1985). 
In these studies, awareness of the author's text structure was indexed by the readers' use of the author's structure in organizing their own recall proto- cols. 
In the study by Meyer, Brandt, and Bluth (1980), skilled ninth-grade readers tended to use the author's top-level structure in organizing their free recalls of expository texts, whereas readers with low comprehension skills did not. 
Furthermore, readers who employed the strat- egy of using the text's top-level structure re- called more information than those who did not. 
Taylor (1980) found the same effect for younger readers. 
Sixth-grade good readers re- called more from short expository passages af- ter two days than sixth-grade poor readers or fourth-grade good readers. 
This differential re- call appeared to be related to the sixth-grade good readers' greater use of text structure: More sixth-grade good readers organized their de- 332 READING RESEARCH QUARTERLY * Summer 1987 XXII/3 layed recalls according to the higher-order text structure than did sixth-grade poor readers or fourth-grade good readers. 
Also, both good and poor readers who organized their recalls ac- cording to the author's higher-order text struc- ture recalled more than readers who did not. 
Similarly, McGee (1982) found that fifth- grade good readers used the author's text struc- ture more and recalled more total and superordinate idea units than fifth-grade poor readers or third-grade good readers. 
Finally, Taylor (1985) examined the ability of sixth- grade and college students to summarize pas- sages from a social studies textbook. 
Compared to college students, sixth-grade students had difficulty understanding important ideas and/or including these ideas in either oral or written summaries. 
One may conclude from the Meyer et al. (1980), Taylor (1980, 1985), and McGee (1982) studies that age and reading ability are highly correlated with recall of expository ma- terial, perhaps because of skilled readers' greater awareness and use of the author's higher-order text structure. 
Other evidence for the importance of awareness and use of text structure in macro- structure formation comes from studies demon- strating that instruction about text structure can improve comprehension and recall. 
One ap- proach to fostering awareness of text structure is to teach readers to make some concrete repre- sentation of the organization of ideas in exposi- tion. 
For example, in strategies such as "networking" (Dansereau et al., 1979) and map- ping (Armbruster & Anderson, 1980; Berko- witz, 1986), readers generate a diagram representing basic ideas and relationships in text. 
These strategies appear to be at least mod- erately successful in improving readers' recall of expository text. 
One limitation of these strate- gies is that they do not necessarily help the reader identify the macrostructure; the reader extracts a structure, which may or may not rep- resent the gist of the text. 
Another approach to teaching text structure is to teach readers to use typographical cues (headings, subheadings, and paragraphs) as in- dices of text structure. 
This was the approach used by Taylor and her colleagues (Taylor, 1982; Taylor & Beach, 1984) in their hierarchi- cal summarization research. 
The hierarchical summarization task consists of first preparing a skeletal outline based on headings, subhead- ings, and paragraphs, and then writing a main idea statement for every point on the outline. 
In experiments with fifth-grade (Taylor, 1982) and seventh-grade students (Taylor & Beach, 1984), subjects who completed hierarchical summaries tended to outperform control groups on some kinds of dependent measures. 
Although the results of the research on hierarchical summari- zation seem promising, a limitation of the strat- egy is that it is highly dependent on the heading-subheading organizational format and on the ability of the headings and subheadings to convey the structure of the text. 
A third approach to teaching text structure is to provide instruction in one or more con- ventional text structures. 
Conventional text structures for expository text include compari- son/contrast, cause/effect, temporal sequence, problem/solution, description, and enumeration (Englert & Hiebert, 1984; Meyer, 1975). 
There are also conventional text structures for particu- lar genres of expository text, such as newspaper articles and research reports. 
The potential of instruction in conventional text structures has been demonstrated in a few recent studies. 
For example, Brooks & Dansereau (1983) identified a structural schema consisting of the categories of knowledge important to understanding a sci- entific theory. 
College students trained in the use of this schema significantly improved in their delayed recall of a scientific text. 
In a study by Barnett (1984), college students who received a brief description of the appropriate text structure before reading either a research report or a journal article recalled significantly more information after two days than either subjects who received the description about text structure after reading or subjects who received no description of text structure. 
Finally, Bartlett (1978) found that teaching ninth-grade students four expository text structures increased their ability to identify and use the higher-order structure of a text and significantly increased the amount of information they remembered. 
In summary, recent research suggests that sensitivity to text structure is an important com- ponent in text comprehension and memory, per- Text structure/summarization instruction ARMBRUSTER, ANDERSON, & OSTERTAG 333 haps because readers who are sensitive to text structure are better able to form macrostruc- tures for the text they read. 
Furthermore, re- search suggests that readers as young as fifth-grade can benefit from instruction in text structures. 
In the present study, we gave fifth-grade students instruction on a conventional exposi- tory text structure (including instruction on summarizing) to see how it would affect their ability to comprehend expository text having this structure. 
Instruction for the experimental group focused on a problem/solution structure, an organizational pattern commonly found in social studies textbooks. 
Expository prose with this structure conveys information about a prob- lem that an individual or group encounters, how they attempt to solve the problem, and the results of the attempt to solve the problem. 
The problem/solution structure is described in our previous study (Armbruster and Anderson, 1985) and is mentioned in many other discus- sions of expository text structure (e.g., Meyer, 1975). 
In the study, children were taught not only to recognize the problem/solution structure, but also to use it in organizing their own written summaries of what they had read. 
Structure training was compared with the more traditional practice of asking students questions and dis- cussing the answers after reading. 
The major hypothesis was that instruction in the problem/solution structure would facili- tate the formation of a macrostructure for text with a problem/solution structure. 
Therefore, compared to the traditionally trained group, the structure-trained group should (a) recall more information on an essay (probed recall) test over the passage main idea, (b) recall about the same amount of information on a short-answer test over specific information not necessarily in- cluded in the macrostructure, (c) write summar- ies that include more passage main ideas, and (d) write better organized summaries (i.e., summaries that have a recognizable structure). 
An additional hypothesis was that using the problem/solution text structure as an organiza- tional framework for classroom discussion should facilitate students' retention of the con- tent discussed. 
Method Subjects Fifth-grade students from four heteroge- neous classrooms in two schools in a small Mid- western city participated in the study. 
Children who were enrolled in remedial reading classes or who scored below fourth-grade level on the reading comprehension subtest of the most re- cently administered Gates-McGinitie Test (2nd edition, Level D, 1978) were eliminated from the study, leaving a total of 82 subjects. 
Of the two classrooms in each school, we assigned one to the structure training treatment, and the other to traditional training. 
Instructional Materials We prepared "workbooks" for both the structure training and the traditional groups. 
The booklets for the structure training subjects contained (a) a definition and description of the problem/solution text structure along with a schematic representation (frame) of the prob- lem/solution text structure (see Figure 1); (b) explicit rules for how to write a summary of problem/solution passages, including a pattern for writing and guidelines for checking the summary (see Figure 2); (c) 13 problem/solu- tion passages from fourth- and fifth-grade so- cial studies textbooks, ranging in length from 100 to 500 words; and (d) multiple copies of problem/solution frames accompanied by blank lines for students to use in writing their sum- maries of the passages. 
The booklets for the traditional training group contained the same problem/solution pas- sages as those in the structure training booklets. 
Each passage was accompanied by five ques- tions. 
The questions were similar to those at the end of textbook lessons or chapters. 
Some of the questions were about information critical to the problem/solution structure; thus, they tapped information similar to that which would be dis- cussed in the structure training group. 
For ex- ample, the question "What did Governor Clinton decide to do?" asks about the action taken to solve a problem. 
Other questions tapped particular facts in the passage that were not critical to the problem/solution structure, as in the question "What two cities were connected 334 READING RESEARCH QUARTERLY * Summer 1987 XXII/3 Figure 1 Problem/solution frame PROBLEM OF ACTION RESULTS PROBLEM = something bad; a situation that people would like to change ACTION = what people do to try to solve the problem RESULTS = what happens as a result of the action; the effect or outcome of trying to solve the problem Text structure/summarization instruction ARMBRUSTER, ANDERSON, & OSTERTAG 335 by the National Road when it was completed?" Each question was accompanied by four blank lines for answers. 
Test Materials We used two categories of dependent mea- sures for the study. 
The first focused on learning from independent reading of a problem/solution passage. 
The second focused on learning from whole-class discussion of a problem/solution text. 
Tests of learning from independent reading. 
The first criterion test was designed to assess comprehension of the higher-order structure of a 525-word passage about homesteading on the Great Plains, selected from a fifth-grade social studies textbook. 
The test consisted of an essay question constructed to assess comprehension of the higher-order structure: "What were the problems that settlers faced on the Great Plains? 
How did they solve those problems?" The second criterion test was a 10-item short-answer test that tapped more specific in- formation from the passage. 
Some of the ques- tions probed recall of specific information related to the problems and solutions discussed in the passage. 
For example, the question "What did the settlers use instead of wood to build houses on the Great Plains?" asks for a specific solution to a specific problem. 
Other questions probed recall of information not di- rectly related to the problem/solution structure, as in the question "What is a homestead?" Two thirds of the 21 possible points on the short-an- swer test were assigned to questions that probed recall of information not directly related to the problem/solution structure. 
The third criterion test was designed to as- sess students' ability to write summaries of problem/solution passages. 
The materials to be summarized were two 200-word passages se- lected from fifth-grade social studies textbooks, one on the problem of obtaining food in Haiti, and the other on the problem of getting oil from Alaska. 
Tests of learning from structured discus- sion. 
The fourth criterion test was designed to assess students' ability to remember information from a section of their regular classroom text- book which had been read and discussed in class. 
The section described problems encoun- tered by settlers in Jamestown. 
The test was an essay question: "Describe two problems that the English colonists faced in the early years of the Jamestown settlement. 
How did they solve those problems?" Instructional Procedures One of us instructed both the structure training and the traditional groups in their nor- mal classrooms with the regular teachers present. 
The instruction took place over 11 con- secutive school days, for 45 minutes per day per class. 
The instruction for the structure training subjects followed principles of explicit or direct instruction (Duffy & Roehler, 1982; Pearson, 1984; Pearson & Gallagher, 1983; Rosenshine, 1986; Rosenshine & Stevens, 1984). 
That is, the instruction featured teacher modeling of ex- plicitly defined procedures, plenty of guided practice on increasingly longer and more diffi- cult passages, teacher monitoring with correc- tive feedback, and independent practice. 
Specifically, the structure training instruction proceeded as follows: Day 1. I (the first author) introduced my- self and provided a rationale for the project (i.e., that social studies texts discuss many problems and solutions; so learning about prob- lem/solution structures would help students fo- cus on main ideas and remember important information). 
Using the first example of a prob- lem/solution text in the workbook, the students discussed answers to the questions "Who has a problem?" "What is the problem?" "What actions were taken to solve the problem?" and "What were the results of those actions?" I ex- plained that these four questions are always as- sociated with problem/solution texts. 
Then I introduced the problem/solution frame (Figure 1) and told the students the diagram would help them organize answers to the four problem/so- lution questions. 
I demonstrated how answers to discussion questions could be recorded in the 336 READING RESEARCH QUARTERLY * Summer 1987 XXII/3 frame. 
Students filled out the frame in their workbooks. 
Day 2. I conducted a brief review, then led a discussion of the second passage in the work- book, recording answers to problem/solution questions in a frame on the blackboard. 
I ex- plained to students that one way to learn from reading textbooks is to summarize the informa- tion. 
I explained the guidelines for summarizing problem/solution passages (see Figure 2) and modeled writing and checking summaries based on the two passages already "framed" in the workbook. 
The students copied the summaries into their notebooks. 
I then led a discussion of the third workbook passage, recording informa- tion in a frame on the blackboard. 
I elicited a summary from the class and recorded it on the board. 
The class used the guidelines to check the summary; then the students copied the sum- mary into their workbooks. 
Days 3 - 9. Students continued to work consecutively through the workbook, following three steps for each passage: first, they read the passage silently, looking for information to an- swer the problem/solution questions; then they recorded notes on the passage in the provided problem/solution frames; finally, they wrote a summary of the framed information. 
Students gradually assumed greater independence in the last two steps. 
As students worked indepen- dently in their workbooks, I circulated and monitored individual work, providing correc- Figure 2 Guidelines for summarizing problem/solution passages How to Summarize Problem/Solution Passages Sentence 1-Tells who had a problem and what the problem is. Sentence 2-Tells what action was taken to try to solve the problem. 
Sentence 3-Tells what happened as a result of the action taken. 
Pattern for Writing a Summary of a Problem/Solution Passage had a problem because Therefore, As a result, Guidelines for Checking Summaries of Problem/Solution Passages Check to see that: 1. Your summary has all of the information that should be in a summary of a problem/solution passage. 
(See "How to Write a Summary of a Problem/Solution Passage.") Compare your summary with the original Problem/Solution passage to make sure that the summary is accurate and complete. 
2. You have used complete sentences. 
3. The sentences are tied together with good connecting words. 
4. The grammar and spelling are correct. 
Text structure/summarization instruction ARMBRUSTER, ANDERSON, & OSTERTAG 337 tive feedback and assistance as needed. 
Stu- dents also were reminded to check their own summaries using the provided guidelines. 
After students had independently framed and summa- rized each passage, I asked two or three of them to write their frames and/or summaries on the board. 
(Sometimes they gave the summaries orally.) The class then discussed and provided feedback on the efforts. 
By the end of Day 9, all passages in the workbook had been read, framed, and summarized. 
Days 10 - 11. Students returned to their classroom textbook, to the place where regular social studies instruction had stopped prior to the intervention. 
Discussion after silent reading was organized around the problem/solution frame. 
I recorded the discussion points in a frame on the blackboard; then students summa- rized the frame orally. 
(The topic read and dis- cussed on this final day of instruction was the problems of the early Jamestown settlers.) Meanwhile, the traditional training group worked from their own workbooks for the first 9 days of instruction. 
Instruction for the tradi- tional training students proceeded in the follow- ing manner: After silently reading the passages, the students discussed the answers to the five questions accompanying each passage. 
To con- trol for effects of practice in writing, I also asked traditional training students to write com- plete answers to all questions. 
As with the structure training group, students in this group assumed greater independence throughout the project; I also provided them with corrective feedback and assistance. 
On the last 2 days of instruction, the traditional training group also returned to the regular classroom textbook and studied the same material the structure training group was studying. 
Thus, instruction for the traditional train- ing group was "traditional" in that it entailed reading and discussing answers to questions. 
The students read the same material as the structure training subjects, to control for prac- tice with problem/solution text structures, and they wrote answers to questions, to control for writing practice. 
Testing Procedures Testing was begun immediately after the 11 days of instruction. 
On the first day of testing, we asked subjects to read and study the passage "Homesteading the Plains" in preparation for a test. Structure training subjects were encour- aged to use the strategy they had been learning. 
Traditional training subjects were told to use any strategy they wished; notetaking and under- lining were mentioned as possibilities. 
All sub- jects received blank paper to use in any way they saw fit as they studied the passage. 
After 18 minutes, the passage and all notes were re- moved, and the essay question was distributed. 
Subjects had 12 minutes to answer the essay question. 
Then the essay question was col- lected, and the short-answer test was distrib- uted. 
Subjects had 12 minutes to complete the short-answer test. All 82 subjects completed these two criterion tests. 
On the second day of testing, subjects were given one of the two 200-word passages to sum- marize, and paper containing 50 blank lines. 
Subjects were told to read the passage and write a summary. 
They were told that their summary could be shorter, but not longer, than 50 words, and that they should write the summary on the provided paper, using complete sentences. 
A summary was defined for all subjects as a shorter form of the original passage that con- tains only the most important points. 
After 20 minutes, passages and summaries were re- moved, and the second passage was distributed. 
Subjects were told to read and study the passage in preparation for writing a summary from memory. 
After 10 minutes, the passage was re- moved, and the paper with the 50 blank lines was distributed. 
Subjects had 10 minutes to write their summaries. 
For this criterion test, then, one passage was summarized with the text present, and the other was summarized without the text. 
Eighty subjects completed this crite- rion test (two were absent). 
The final criterion test was administered 6 days after the completion of instruction. 
Sub- jects were given the essay question about the problems of the Jamestown settlers. 
All subjects had read about this topic in their classroom text- 338 READING RESEARCH QUARTERLY * Summer 1987 XXII/3 book and had discussed it on the final day of instruction. 
Subjects were given 15 minutes to write their answers. 
Seventy-nine subjects com- pleted this criterion test. Scoring Two of us independently scored the essay and short-answer tests using answer keys. 
For the first essay test, the total possible score was 39 points (one point for each of 39 relevant propositions); for the short-answer test, 21 points (one point for each of 21 relevant propo- sitions); and for the second (delayed) essay test, 28 points (one point for each of 28 relevant propositions). 
Interrater agreement for the first essay test was 89%, for the short-answer test, 96%, and for the second (delayed) essay test, 85%. 
Disagreements were resolved in confer- ence. 
The summaries were scored for relative im- portance of ideas using the following proce- dure. 
First, the two passages were parsed into idea units, which were basically independent clauses. 
The idea units were listed in the order in which they appeared in the passage. 
Five adults were asked to read the two passages and then rate the relative importance of the idea units using a modification of the procedure in- troduced by Johnson (1970). 
Specifically, the adult raters were asked to place a I beside the n idea units (n = 1/4 of the total idea units) that were most important to the meaning of the pas- sage, a 2 beside the n idea units that were next most important, and so on for the four levels of importance. 
The adult ratings were then aver- aged to produce a master scoring key for each passage. 
Next, the subjects' summary protocols were parsed into idea units. 
Two of us sorted the idea units from the summary protocols into one of the four categories of importance identified on the master key, or into a fifth category, of extra- neous ideas. 
Extraneous ideas consisted of in- formation that was not present in the original passage, including distortions and intrusions. 
For a random sample of 50 summaries (about one-third of the total), interrater agreement was 94%. 
The summaries were also evaluated for quality of writing, using the Rating Guide for Functional Writing as developed for the Illinois Writing Assessment Program (Illinois State Board of Education, 1984). 
The Rating Guide generates subscores for focus, support, and or- ganization, as well as an overall holistic, or in- tegration, score. 
Each subscore indexes a different feature of the written piece. 
The focus score reflects the clarity of the subject and main points; the support score indicates the quantity and quality of the supporting information; and the organization score reflects the use of struc- ture, transitions, and logic in the piece. 
The in- tegration score indexes the overall development and integration of the features. 
Each scale has a range of 1 (low) to 6 (high). 
Typed versions of the summaries were scored blind by two class- room teachers (not otherwise associated with the study) who had been trained by the State of Illinois in this rating procedure. 
The teachers worked together to score each summary. 
Data Analysis Because students had not been randomly assigned to treatment conditions, the mean reading comprehension ability scores for the four classrooms were computed and compared. 
Scores on the most recently administered read- ing comprehension subtest of the Gates- MacGinitie Test (2nd edition, Form D) were used for this purpose. 
The classroom means (and standard deviations) were 26.2 (5.8), 30.7 (6.3), 30.7 (5.5), and 30.1 (6.3). A one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with four levels for the four classrooms showed no significant difference between classrooms; we concluded that there were no major differences in reading ability among the four groups of students. 
In or- der to examine the effect of reading comprehen- sion ability, however, we sorted subjects into three ability levels (low, medium, and high) on the basis of their Gates-MacGinitie scores. 
Various forms of mixed analyses of vari- ance with unweighted means were used to ana- lyze the data. 
In all analyses in which the condition of homogeneity of variance was not satisfied, the Greenhouse-Geisser (1959) de- Text structure/summarization instruction ARMBRUSTER, ANDERSON, & OSTERTAG 339 grees-of-freedom adjustment factor was used, and the resulting conservative F value was re- ported. 
Differences between individual group means were tested by pooling sums of squares and using the Newman-Keuls multiple compari- son technique (Glass & Hopkins, 1984). 
Results Learning from Independent Reading Essay test. Scores consisting of percentage correct of total possible points (39) on the essay test for the passage about homesteading on the Great Plains were analyzed using a 2 (school) x 3 (ability) x 2 (training condition) between- groups ANOVA design. 
Significant main effects were found for training condition, F(1, 70) = 7.24, p < .01, and ability, F(2, 70) = 17.45, p < .0001. According to the Newman-Keuls tests, the structure training group (M = 37.4) scored higher (p < .01) than the traditional training group (M = 25.6). The high-ability students (M = 46.9) scored significantly higher (p < .01) than the medium-ability students (M = 32.6), who scored significantly higher (p < .01) than the low-ability students (M = 15.2). 
There were no other significant main or interac- tion effects. 
Short-answer test. Percentage correct scores on the 10-item (21-point) short-answer test were also analyzed using a 2 (school) x 3 (ability) x 2 (training condition) ANOVA de- sign. 
Results showed a significant main effect for ability, F(2, 70) = 28.8, p < .001. High- ability students (M = 68.6) scored significantly higher (p < .001) than medium-ability stu- dents (M = 49.5), who scored significantly higher (p < .001) than low-ability students (M = 25.8). No other main or interaction effects were significant. 
Written summaries test-Importance levels. 
For the summaries, we were interested in a rela- tive index of how subjects chose to distribute ideas across importance levels, given limited space. 
Recall that the summary protocols were restricted to a maximum of 50 words; most stu- dents wrote to this limit. 
The protocols were parsed into idea units and sorted into five cate- gories: four normed levels of importance (Lev- els 1 to 4) and a fifth category for extraneous ideas (Level 5). The score for each category was converted into a "percent of total" metric. 
Therefore, these repeated measures composed an ipsative, ordered set, in that the sum of all five category scores was equal to 100 for each student, and the levels ranged in importance of idea units from 1 (most important) to 5 (extra- neous). 
There were five factors in this analysis. 
The three between-groups factors were the two schools, two training conditions, and three abil- ity groups. 
In addition, there were two within- subject factors: five levels of importance and two summarizing conditions (with and without text). 
Because the main dependent measure is ipsative, the test of the experimental hypotheses (represented by the training and summarizing condition factors) is whether there are signifi- cant changes in the pattern or profile of the im- portance factor. 
Therefore, we are not interested in main effects for school, training, ability, or summarizing condition; the main fo- cus of the analysis is on the interaction of the importance factor with the other four factors. 
A significant main effect was found for im- portance level, F(4, 272) = 45.5, p < .0001. 
Subjects included a significantly higher per- centage of idea units at Level 1 (most important) than at the other four levels. 
None of the other four means was significantly different from any other (unweighted M = 40.6 > > 14.7 - 13.1 - 14.9 - 16.8).' We also found a significant Training x Im- portance interaction effect, F(4, 272) = 17.5, p < .0001. Unweighted means for the struc- ture training group for the five importance lev- els were 46.7 > > 15.8 - 11.6 > 3.5 < < 21.7; unweighted means for the traditional training group were 34.5 > > 13.7 - 14.6 < < 26.4 > > 11.9. 
There was a tendency for the structure training group to have more Level 1 (most important) idea units, p < .001, and fewer Level 4 (least important) idea units, p < .001, in their summaries than the traditional training group. 
However, the structure training group also included significantly more Level 5 (extraneous) idea units, p < .05. 340 READING RESEARCH QUARTERLY * Summer 1987 XXII/3 There was also a significant Importance x Summarizing Condition interaction effect, F(4, 272) = 19.07, p < .00001. 
When subjects wrote summaries with text available, the profile of importance level decreases from a high at Level 1 to a low at Level 5 (unweighted M = 38.3 > > 21.1 - 17.0 - 17.7 > > 5.9). 
However, when subjects wrote summaries from memory (text unavailable), the profile of impor- tance levels shows many Level 1 (most impor- tant) and Level 5 (extraneous) idea units, but few idea units at Levels 2, 3, and 4 (unweighted M = 42.9 > > 8.4 - 9.3 - 12.2 < < 27.7.) The means for the two summarizing con- ditions differed significantly at Levels 2 and 5, p < .001. 
As shown in Figure 3, there was a signifi- cant effect of the triple interaction involving the training, importance, and summarizing condi- tion factors, F(4, 272) = 3.17, p < .01. As discussed above, the significant interaction of importance profile with summarizing condition is apparent, but superimposed on that interac- tion is the effect due to training. 
When the structure training group did not have a text available, they included significantly more ex- traneous idea units than the traditional training group, p < .001; however, both groups in- cluded significantly more Level 5 idea units without the text than with the text, p < .001. 
The interaction between importance level and ability was significant, F(8, 272) = 4.22, p < .0001. 
The profiles show that the high- and medium-ability groups performed at about the same level, whereas the summaries of the low- ability group had significantly fewer Level 1 idea units than those of the high-ability group, p < .05. For the medium- and high-ability stu- dents, the difference between the percentages of Level 1 and of Level 5 idea units was large and significant, p < .001. 
However, the low-ability group showed no significant difference between the percentages of Level 1 and of Level 5 idea units in their summaries. 
The effect of the triple interaction between importance level, ability, and summarizing con- dition was also significant, F(8, 272) = 2.79, p < .01. 
As illustrated in Figure 4, the profiles Figure 3 Interaction between summarizing, training, and importance level factors 50 - Summarizing With Text 45 "Structure Training 40........ Traditional Training 0 35 n- i. t 30 0". S25 - 20 - 10 5 0 i I I I 1 2 3 4 5 50 - Summarizing Without Text 45 - 40 35 30 25 20 - . 
. 
. 
. 
15 . 
10 1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 5 IMPORTANCE LEVEL Text structure/summarization instruction ARMBRUSTER, ANDERSON, & OSTERTAG 341 of importance levels when the text was available did not differ significantly between the three ability levels. 
The profile curves generally de- crease smoothly from Level 1 to Level 5. Only the high-ability group included in their sum- maries significantly more idea units at Level 1 than at any other level, p < .001. 
Profile curves based on the summaries when the text was not available show a very dif- ferent pattern. 
For each ability group, the pro- file curve is U-shaped due to higher percentages of Level 1 and Level 5 idea units. 
However, the critical difference between these three profile curves is that the summaries of the high- and medium-ability groups included significantly more Level 1 ideas than ideas at any other level, p < .01, whereas the low-ability students had a significantly higher percentage of idea units at Level 5 than at any other level, p < .05. 
Written summaries test-Quality ratings. 
Recall that the summaries were also rated on four dimensions of quality: integration, focus, support/elaboration, and organization. 
These measures were analyzed in a five-way ANOVA. 
Three factors-school, training condition, and ability-were between-groups factors, and two factors- quality dimension and summarizing condition - were within-subject factors. 
There was a significant main effect of qual- ity dimension, F(3, 198) = 69.3, p < .00001; unweighted overall means for the four quality conditions of focus, organization, integration and support/elaboration were 2.63 - 2.42 > > 1.96 > 1.75. 
There was also a significant main effect of ability, F(2, 66) = 6.8, p < .01; the unweighted means for the high-, medium-, and low-ability groups were 2.46, 2.29, and 1.82. Finally, there was a significant main ef- fect of training condition, F(1, 66) = 99.8, p < .00001. 
The structure training group received much higher ratings (unweighted M = 2.64) than did the traditional training group (M = 1.74, p < .01). 
The effect of the interaction between train- ing condition and summarizing condition was significant, F(1, 66) = 6.81, p < .05. 
Al- though the structure training group wrote better summaries in both summarizing conditions, they wrote slightly better ones with the text available (M = 2.71) than without it (M = 2.56). On the other hand, the traditional train- ing group wrote summaries that were slightly Figure 4 Interaction between ability, importance level, and summarizing factors 55 Summarizing With Text 50 ---- High Ability 45 ........ Medium Ability I 0- Low Ability S 40 - S 35 35 30 S22 3 4 5 15 goo 10 1 2 3 4 5 55 Summarizing Without Text 50 C so - 45 35 30 \ 25 \ 20 15 \ .. 10 ' 5 0 1 2 3 4 5 IMPORTANCE LEVEL 342 READING RESEARCH QUARTERLY * Summer 1987 XXII/3 lower in quality with the text available (with text, M = 1.54; without text, M = 1.95). 
The significant effect of the interaction be- tween quality dimension and training condition shows that the structure training group scored significantly higher than the traditional training group, F(3, 198) = 12.54, p < .00001, on all quality categories except the category of sup- port/elaboration. 
The mean ratings for the structure training group on the quality dimen- sions of integration, focus, support/elaboration, and organization were 2.34, 3.29, 2.00, and 2.92. The means for the traditional training group on those same dimensions were 1.59, 1.97, 1.50, and 1.92, respectively. 
As for the significant effect for the interac- tion between ability and quality dimension, F(6, 198) = 2.67, p < .05, the ratings on the dimensions of integration, focus, and support/ elaboration were not significantly different for the three ability levels (low, M = 1.58, 2.31, and 1.48; middle, M = 2.10, 2.81, and 1.82; and high, M = 2.20, 2.77, and 1.97, respec- tively). 
On the dimension of organization, how- ever, the high-ability group (M = 2.92) scored significantly higher than the low-ability group (M = 1.91), p < .01, but not significantly higher than the medium-ability group (M = 2.42); the mean rating for the medium-ability group was not significantly different from that for the low-ability group. 
Learning from Classroom Discussion The percentages of idea units remembered after a classroom discussion about a problem/ solution passage were analyzed in an ANOVA with three between-groups factors: school, training, and ability. 
We found only a weak main effect for ability, marginally significant at p = .06, and no significant interaction effect. 
Unweighted means for the low-, medium-, and high-ability groups were 13.7, 14.6, and 21.6. 
Discussion The data analyses provide evidence to sup- port the major hypothesis that instruction in a problem/solution text structure, including sum- marization instruction, would facilitate the for- mation of macrostructures for text having that structure. 
The evidence comes from confirma- tion of four out of the five hypotheses. 
The first hypothesis was that, compared to the traditional training group, the structure training group should recall more information on an essay test over the main idea of a prob- lem/solution passage. 
Compared to traditional training students, structure-trained students re- called about 50% more of the macrostructure ideas of a 525-word textbook passage read inde- pendently. 
Furthermore, the training was effec- tive for all three ability groups, for although there were main effects for treatment and abil- ity, treatment and ability did not interact. 
The second hypothesis was also confirmed. 
Although structure training facilitated essay test performance, it did not affect performance on the short-answer test. Recall that most of the items on the short-answer test asked for specific facts that were independent of the macrostruc- ture. 
We did not expect that text structure train- ing would necessarily facilitate recall of this type of information. 
The third hypothesis was that, compared to the traditional training group, the structure training group should write Summaries that in- cluded more passage main ideas. 
Indeed, the structure training group included significantly more Level 1 (most important) and significantly fewer Level 4 (least important) idea units in their summaries. 
Apparently, instruction in the problem/solution structure helped students ex- tract the main points of problem/solution pas- sages. 
However, compared to the traditional train- ing group, the structure training group also in- cluded more Level 5 (extraneous) idea units in their summaries. 
The tendency for structure training students to include more Level 5 idea units in their summaries was especially evident in the interactions with summarizing condition: Structure training students tended to include more Level 5 idea units when the text was un- available (Figure 3). Also, students of lower ability, in particular, had difficulty when the text was unavailable (Figure 4). This effect may be due to the confounding of summarizing con- Text structure/summarization instruction ARMBRUSTER, ANDERSON, & OSTERTAG 343 dition with passage (recall that subjects summa- rized one passage that was available and a different passage that was no longer available). 
Therefore, differential performance in the two summarizing conditions could be attributable to passage differences. 
However, we believe that the following explanation is also consistent with these results. 
The structure training group had learned the kind of information that is included in a problem/solution text and that should be in their summaries; however, in the independent reading situation, it was still up to them to in- stantiate the frame with the appropriate infor- mation. 
When the text was unavailable, structure training students may have suffered from one or both of the following problems: (a) failure to instantiate the frame with the appro- priate information at encoding, or (b) failure to recall the appropriate information to instantiate the frame at retrieval. In other words, when structure training students did not sufficiently understand or remember the actual passage content, they tended to instantiate the problem/ solution frame with extraneous information. 
An example of a summary text that sup- ports this explanation is the following: The Alskans had a problem because they coul- dent get oil from texas therefore they built pipe lines as a result the oil was pumped from texas to Alaska. 
[sic] This summary was written by a student from the low-ability group when the text was unavail- able. 
The student has clearly learned to use the problem/solution frame, but is badly confused about the content. 
(The passage discussed the problem of getting oil from Alaska to other states; Texas was mentioned merely as another oil-producing state.) The results also confirmed the fourth hy- pothesis: Compared to the traditional training group, the structure training group should write better organized summaries. 
The structure training group received much higher quality rat- ings on the dimension of organization, as well as on focus and integration. 
However, the sig- nificant effect of the ability by quality dimen- sion interaction showed that the instruction was not equally effective for all ability groups. 
Al- though the low-ability group did as well as the high-ability group on the dimensions of integra- tion, focus, and support/elaboration, they did not do as well on the important dimension of or- ganization. 
We qualify conclusions about the quality of summary writing by observing that the Illinois Writing Assessment Program's Rating Guide for Functional Writing may not be very appro- priate for rating summaries. 
One reason for our suspicion is that the composite means for the ratings were so low: For the high-, medium-, and low-ability groups, the means were 2.46, 2.29, and 1.82 out of a possible 6 points. 
Al- though these low means could reflect relatively poor-quality summaries, they could also indi- cate an invalid index of summary quality. 
An- other reason for our suspicion is that categories such as focus and support/elaboration do not seem appropriate for summaries. 
Despite possi- ble problems with the rating scale, however, the scores do appear to reflect relative differences in the quality of the written summaries. 
Our final hypothesis was that using the problem/solution text structure as an organiza- tional framework for classroom discussion should facilitate retention of the content dis- cussed. 
The data do not support this hypothesis. 
The reason for this result may be that the partic- ular classroom discussion that was the basis for the criterion test was very similar for the struc- ture training and traditional training groups. 
For both groups, the classroom discussion cen- tered around a selection from the regular class- room textbook about the settlement of Jamestown. 
The selection was clearly about problems and solutions; in fact, two of the four subheadings were "What problems did these early settlers have to solve?" (problems) and "What new plan helped to make the colony a success?" (actions and results). 
Therefore, a le- gitimate classroom discussion of the selection would have to focus on problems and solutions. 
In fact, the only real difference between the dis- cussions for the treatment groups was that, for the structure training group, we recorded dis- cussion points in a frame on the chalkboard- apparently not a very powerful difference. 
Another possible explanation is that stu- dents need to be actively involved in the forma- 344 READING RESEARCH QUARTERLY * Summer 1987 XXII/3 tion of the macrostructure if they are to benefit from it. In an independent reading situation, students are actively involved; they have to gen- erate the problem/solution structure on their own. 
In the lecture situation, the class worked collectively to fill in the problem/solution frame; therefore, most individuals were proba- bly less actively involved. 
In general, then, the results of this study suggest that direct instruction of a conventional text structure can facilitate formation of a mac- rostructure for that type of text. 
Fifth-grade stu- dents were successfully taught to form a macrostructure for problem/solution textbook passages read independently, as assessed by both an essay question over main points and a summarization task. 
For the essay question task, the instruction was effective for all ability groups. 
For the summarization tasks, the in- struction was least effective for the low-ability group. 
This result is not surprising; other re- search has demonstrated the difficulty of the task of summarizing, particularly for younger and less able students (Brown & Day, 1983; Brown, Day, & Jones, 1983; Brown & Smiley, 1977, 1978). 
For students of lower ability, the instruction should probably provide considera- bly more practice and feedback. 
There were two components to the instruc- tion in this study: recognizing a text structure and using a text structure to write summaries. 
Future research should investigate the distinc- tive contribution of each component. 
Mean- while, as we await further research, the results of this instructional program should be encour- aging to educators concerned with reading (and writing!) in content area classrooms. 
REFERENCES ARMBRUSTER, B.B., & ANDERSON, T.H. (1980). 
The effect of mapping on the free recall of expository text (Tech. 
Rep. 
No. 160). 
Urbana-Champaign: University of Illinois, Center for the Study of Reading. 
ARMBRUSTER, B.B., & ANDERSON, T.H. (1985). 
Frames: Structures for informative text. 
In D.H. 
Jonassen (Ed.), The technology of text (Vol. 
2, pp. 90-104). 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Educational Technology Publications. 
BARNETT, J.E. (1984). 
Facilitating retention through in- struction about text structure. 
Journal of Reading Be- havior, 16, 1-13. 
BARTLETT, B.J. (1978). 
Top-level structure as an organiza- tional strategy for recall of classroom text. 
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Arizona State University, Tempe. 
BERKOWITZ, S.J. (1986). 
Effects of instruction in text orga- nization on sixth-grade students' memory for expository reading. 
Reading Research Quarterly, 21, 161-178. 
BROOKS, L.W., & DANSEREAU, D.E (1983). 
Effects of struc- tural schema training and text organization on exposi- tory prose processing. 
Journal of Educational Psychology, 75, 811-820. 
BROWN, A.L., & DAY, J.D. (1983). 
Macrorules for summa- rizing texts: The development of expertise. 
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 22, 1-14. 
BROWN, A.L., DAY, J.D., & JONES, R.S. (1983). 
The develop- ment of plans for summarizing texts. 
Child Develop- ment, 54, 968-979. 
BROWN, A.L., & SMILEY, S.S. (1977). 
Rating the importance of structural units of prose passages: A problem of me- tacognitive development. 
Child Development, 48, 1454- 1466. 
BROWN, A.L., & SMILEY, S.S. (1978). 
The development of strategies for studying texts. 
Child Development, 49, 1076-1088. 
DANSEREAU, D.F., COLLINS, K.W., MCDONALD, B.A., HOL- LEY, C.D., GARLAND, J., DIEKHOFF, G., & EVANS, S.H. (1979). 
Development and evaluation of a learning strat- egy training program. 
Journal of Educational Psychol- ogy, 71, 64-73. 
DUFFY, G.G., & ROEHLER, L.R. (1982). 
Direct instruction of comprehension: What does it really mean? 
Reading Ho- rizons, 23, 35-40. 
ENGLERT, C.S., & HIEBERT, E. (1984). 
Children's developing awareness of text structures in expository materials. 
Journal of Educational Psychology, 76, 65-74. 
GLASS, G.V., & HOPKINS, K.D. (1984). 
Statistical methods in education and psychology (2nd ed.). 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 
GREENHOUSE, S.W., & GEISSER, S. (1959). 
On methods in the analysis of profile data. 
Psychometrika, 24, 95-112. 
ILLINOIS STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION. 
(1984). 
Rating guide for functional writing. 
Springfield, IL: Author. 
JOHNSON, R.E. (1970). 
Recall of prose as a function of the structural importance of the linguistic units. 
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 9, 12-20. 
MACGINITIE, W.H. (1978). 
Gates-MacGinitie Reading Tests. 
Chicago, IL: Riverside. 
MCGEE, L.M. (1982). 
Awareness of text structure: Effects on children's recall of expository text. 
Reading Research Quarterly, 17, 581-590. 
MEYER, B.J.F (1975). 
The organization of prose and its ef- fects on memory. 
Amsterdam: North-Holland. 
MEYER, B.J.E, BRANDT, D.M., & BLUTH, G.J. (1980). 
Use of top-level structure in text: Key for reading comprehen- sion of ninth-grade students. 
Reading Research Quar- terly, 16, 72-103. 
PEARSON, P.D. (1984). 
Direct explicit teaching of reading comprehension. 
In G.G. 
Duffy, L.R. 
Roehler, & J. Ma- son (Eds.), Comprehension instruction: Perspectives and suggestions (pp. 
222-233). 
New York: Longman. 
Text structure/summarization instruction ARMBRUSTER, ANDERSON, & OSTERTAG 345 PEARSON, P.D., & GALLAGHER, M.C. (1983). 
The instruction of reading comprehension. 
Contemporary Educational Psychology, 8, 317-344. 
ROSENSHINE, B. (1986). 
Synthesis of research on explicit teaching. 
Educational Leadership, 43, 60-69. 
ROSENSHINE, B., & STEVENS, R. (1984). 
Classroom instruc- tion in reading. 
In P.D. 
Pearson (Ed.), Handbook of reading research (pp. 
745-798). 
New York: Longman. 
RUMELHART, D.E., & ORTONY, A. (1977). 
The representa- tion of knowledge in memory. 
In R.C. 
Anderson, R.J. 
Spiro, & W.E. 
Montague (Eds.), Schooling and the ac- quisition of knowledge (pp. 
99-136). 
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
SPIRO, R.J., & TAYLOR, B.M. (1980). 
On investigating chil- dren's transition from narrative to expository discourse: The multidimensional nature of psychological text clas- sification (Tech. 
Rep. 
No. 195). 
Urbana-Champaign: University of Illinois, Center for the Study of Reading. 
TAYLOR, B.M. (1980). 
Children's memory for expository text after reading. 
Reading Research Quarterly, 15, 399-411. 
TAYLOR, B.M. (1982). 
Text structure and children's compre- hension and memory for expository material. Journal of Educational Psychology, 74, 323-340. 
TAYLOR, B.M. (1985). 
Toward an understanding of factors contributing to children's difficulty summarizing text- book material. In J.A. 
Niles (Ed.), Issues in literacy: A research perspective. 
Thirty-fourth yearbook of the Na- tional Reading Conference (pp. 
125-131). 
Rochester, NY: National Reading Conference. 
TAYLOR, B.M., & BEACH, R.W. (1984). 
The effects of text structure instruction on middle-grade students' compre- hension and production of expository text. 
Reading Re- search Quarterly, 19, 134-146. 
TAYLOR, K.K. (1986). 
Summary writing by young children. 
Reading Research Quarterly, 21, 193-208. 
VAN DIJK, T.A., & KINTSCH, W. (1983). 
Strategies of dis- course comprehension. 
New York: Academic Press. 
WINOGRAD, P.N. (1984). 
Strategic difficulties in summariz- ing texts. 
Reading Research Quarterly, 19, 404-425. 
Footnotes The work upon which this publication is based was per- formed pursuant to contract No. NIE-400-81-0030 of the National Institute of Education. 
It does not, however, neces- sarily reflect the views of this agency. 
The authors are grateful to Kathryn Ransom, Coordinator of Chapter 1 Reading for the Springfield, Illinois, Public Schools; to teachers Douglas Goss, Phyllis Lape, Margaret Maddox, and William Vickers; and to their students who participated in the study. 
The authors are also grateful to Barak Rosenshine and several anonymous reviewers for helpful comments on earlier drafts of this paper. 
'In reported means from multiple comparison analyses, the sign > > indicates greater than at p < .01; the sign > indicates greater than at p < .05; the sign - indicates no significant difference between means. 
346 READING RESEARCH QUARTERLY * Summer 1987 XXII/3 