Published by: http://www.sagepublications.com On behalf of: Society for Personality and Social Psychology can be found at:Personality and Social Psychology BulletinAdditional services and information for http://psp.sagepub.com/cgi/alertsEmail Alerts: http://psp.sagepub.com/subscriptionsSubscriptions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.navReprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.navPermissions: http://psp.sagepub.com/content/33/6/776.refs.htmlCitations: What is This? 
- May 4, 2007 OnlineFirst Version of Record - May 25, 2007Version of Record >> 776 Helping to Improve the Group Stereotype: On the Strategic Dimension of Prosocial Behavior Nick Hopkins University of Dundee, Scotland Steve Reicher Kate Harrison Clare Cassidy University of St. Andrews, Scotland Rebecca Bull University of Aberdeen, Scotland Mark Levine University of Lancaster, England behavior reflects an underlying prosocial impulse. 
That is, people help out of a desire to do good to others and refrain from helping when dispositions or circumstances dull that desire. 
However, a wealth of anthropological analyses of gift exchange (e.g., Malinowski, 1922; Mauss 1907/1954) shows that the giving of goods or services can reflect other motivations. 
For example, Mauss (1907/1954) described customs of giving that are less to do with helping others and more to do with demonstrating one clan’s superiority over others in a local group hierarchy. 
Such analyses point out that acts of giving may be intergroup in nature and need to be analysed through reference to the intergroup relations within which they take place. 
This logic is illustrated in recent social psychological research by Nadler and Halabi (Nadler, 2002; Nadler & Halabi, 2006). 
They showed that members of a Authors’ Note: This research was made possible through the Constitutional Change and Identity Program supported by the Leverhulme Trust. Thanks are due to Dr. Rona Dolev who was the experimental confederate in Study 3. PSPB, Vol. 
33 No. 6, June 2007 776-788 DOI: 10.1177/0146167207301023 © 2007 by the Society for Personality and Social Psychology, Inc. 
Three studies consider a basis for intergroup helping. 
Specifically, they show that group members may help others to disconfirm a stereotype of their own group as mean. 
Study 1 shows that Scots believe they are seen as mean by the English, resent this stereotype, are motivated to refute it, and believe out-group helping is a particularly effective way of doing so. Study 2 shows that increasing the salience of the English stereotype of the Scottish as mean leads Scots to accentuate the extent to which Scots are depicted as generous. 
Study 3 shows that increasing the salience of the stereotype of the Scots as mean results in an increase in the help volunteered to out-group members. 
These results highlight how strategic concerns may result in out-group helping. 
In turn, they underscore the point that helping others may be a means to advance a group’s interest. Keywords: metastereotypes; prosocial behavior; out-group helping “Nothing in human nature is so God-like as the disposition to do good to our fellow creatures.” In these words, the novelist Samuel Richardson (writing in 1742, p. 62) sums up a common assumption about helping: Prosocial powerful group might provide help to members of powerless groups as a means of maintaining the dependency of their subordinates. 
Equally, members of powerless groups may reject help from powerful groups especially when they are challenging intergroup inequalities. 
The wider implication is that helping can be grounded less in a desire to alleviate the plight of the recipient than in an attempt to improve the lot of the donor. 
It does not always reveal a God-like disposition. 
This article explores further the group interests that intergroup helping may service. 
We seek to show that helping others—especially out-group others—may be increased when group members wish to ameliorate the perceptions held about one’s group by others. 
Specifically, we explore whether telling Scots that the English consider them mean results in increased helping toward representatives of a third-party national outgroup (the Welsh). 
Before explaining the context of our studies and our hypotheses, we outline the grounds for studying helping as a group phenomenon and then consider the strategic side of group behavior. 
Helping as a Group Process From its inception, helping research addressed collective phenomena. 
Much attention focused on the idea that the larger the group, the greater the diffusion of responsibility such that each individual feels less obligation to act (Latané & Nida, 1981). 
Yet from early on it was clear that the presence of fellow bystanders can, under certain conditions, increase intervention, especially when other bystanders help (Bryan & Test, 1967). 
What seems critical is the extent to which people see themselves as belonging to a common social group (Darley, Teger, & Lewis, 1973; Horowitz, 1971; Rutkowski, Gruder, & Romer, 1983). 
Where they do, they will be influenced by the actions of their fellows, whether in the direction of intervention or nonintervention. 
Where they don’t, the actions of one bystander will have little impact upon that of others (Levine, Cassidy, Brazier, & Reicher, 2002). 
In short, what matters is not so much whether bystanders constitute a physical group but rather whether they constitute a psychological group (Turner, Hogg, Oakes, Reicher & Wetherell, 1987) and, if they are a psychological group, whether their norms support or oppose intervention (Horowitz, 1971; Rutkowski et al., 1983). 
A similar argument can be made concerning the relationship between bystanders and victims. 
People are more likely to feel concern for those seen as belonging to the same group as themselves and, hence, are more likely to help them (Dovidio et al., 1997; Levine et al., 2002; Stürmer, Snyder, & Omoto, 2005). 
What is more, when the boundaries of in-group inclusion are drawn more broadly people become more inclusive in terms of whom they will help (Levine, Prosser, Evans, & Reicher, 2005). 
Work on the psychology of volunteerism shows that the importance of common group membership is not limited to face-to-face helping but extends to broader forms of social solidarity. 
The more that people identify with a particular community, the more they are likely to volunteer for organizations that provide support for that community (Simon, Stürmer, & Steffens, 2000). 
Such collective action may have greater impact than individual interventions in cases of emergency. 
For example, whereas acts of individual bravery undoubtedly saved individual Jews from the Nazi holocaust, the large-scale collective mobilizations in countries such as Bulgaria saved many more (Genov & Baeva, 2003). 
Analysis of the key documents addressed to the Bulgarian population shows that both definitions of shared group membership and in-group norms were important in the rescue of Bulgarian Jews (Reicher, Cassidy, Wolpert, Hopkins & Levine, 2006). 
Jewish people were consistently construed as a Bulgarian (ingroup) minority rather than a religious or ethnic outgroup and Bulgarian identity was associated with norms opposing oppression. 
There is, therefore, archival, survey and experimental research demonstrating the theoretical and practical importance of group processes for helping. 
This evidence shows how the cognitive salience of category membership and category content affects the support we give to others. 
The Strategic Side of Group Helping Reicher et al. (2006) identified one further argument that was used to promote the rescue of Bulgarian Jews: If Bulgaria wished to be regarded as a civilized nation, it could not be complicit in mass slaughter. 
This argument has less to do with defining the boundaries to in-group inclusion and group norms and more to do with advancing group interests. 
Therefore, it fits with a growing literature stressing the need to consider the strategic dimension to group action (see Klein, Spears, & Reicher, in press; Reicher, Spears, & Postmes, 1995). 
Of particular interest is the idea that actors may seek to induce others to see their group as they themselves wish it to be seen. 
For example, Klein and Azzi (2001) showed that group members, when confronted with an out-group depiction of their in-group, will confirm positive aspects of this stereotype yet disconfirm the negative aspects. 
Our work develops this logic. 
It explores how group helping behaviors may be a way of responding to specific types of perceived negative out-group stereotypes. 
(In saying this, we do not dispute that there may be other ways of doing so, but our concern here has to do with stereotype disconfirmation as a basis for helping and not with the forms of stereotype disconfirmation per se.) Whereas helping has positive moral connotations that may serve to ameliorate negative outgroup stereotypes in general, we expect that the meanings associated with such actions will be particularly effective in disconfirming stereotypes that portray the in-group as having specific antisocial characteristics: being selfish or egocentric. 
This is not to say that there may not be other ways of disconfirming such stereotypes. 
Our point is rather that one reason that people help is to demonstrate their generosity to doubting others. 
In turn, this implies that people are likely to help more when confronted with such out-group doubts. 
Furthermore, we suggest that the motive to disconfirm mean stereotypes of the in-group specifically affects the help proffered to out-group members. 
This is something of particular note because the group processes discussed above typically imply increased help to other in-group members. 
The difference arises because helping, as we conceptualize it here, is an act of communication with different forms of helping having different communicational value. 
From this perspective, helping one’s own is weakly diagnostic of a group’s qualities: Such help is to be expected from any group and can easily be construed as selfish and sectarian. 
By contrast, helping out-group members is more noteworthy and diagnostic. 
This is readily apparent in the biblical parable of the good Samaritan, in which a Samaritan helps a Levite at a time when Samaritans were regarded by Jews as a rival ethnic out-group. 
That the act of helping depicted here is intergroup is crucial to the parable’s power. 
Such helping is unexpected and cannot be dismissed as an example of group members simply looking after their own. 
Drawing these points together, we propose that outgroup helping may be used to challenge negative outgroup stereotypes in general and mean heterostereotypes in particular. 
We predict that, where group members are made aware that a significant out-group stereotypes them as mean, they will emphasize their helpfulness, specifically through increasing levels of helping to a third party out-group. 
However, not all group members will be equally motivated to act in this way. 
How people respond to negative characterizations of their group (and other threats to collective identity) depends on their degree of group identification, with high identifiers being more motivated to act in ways that defend or promote the in-group (Branscome, Ellemers, Spears, & Doosje, 1999). 
It follows that our predicted effect should be greater amongst high identifiers. 
This Research Our research explores how the helping behavior of Scots is affected when their reputation for being mean is made salient. 
The stereotype of the Scots as mean is widespread and features as an illustrative example in Allport’s 1954 classic, The Nature of Prejudice. 
“A Scotsman who is penurious,” he wrote, “delights us because he vindicates our prejudgment” (p. 22). 
This stereotype continues to have popular currency and continues to annoy Scottish people. 
This is well illustrated in the way Scots react to the jokes told about their meanness. 
For instance, one Web site reports a number of such jokes and then retorts that Scots give “more to registered charities per head of population than any other part of the United Kingdom” (Being Mean, n.d.). 
Throughout our research, we also sought to capitalize on the intergroup relationship between the Scots and the English. 
Scotland and England are united in a single state, yet although Scots may define themselves as British, a Scottish identification remains potent and is bound up with intergroup comparisons with the (historically more powerful) English rival (Hopkins & Moore, 2001). 
Scots often complain that the English are arrogant and ignorant about their northern neighbors and resent the way they are characterized (or more accurately, think they are characterized) by the English (Reicher & Hopkins, 2001). 
In our research we encouraged our participants, who were young Scots, to reflect on the Scottish-English relationship and the degree to which they are seen by the English as being mean. 
In the first study, we investigated whether Scots believed themselves to be seen as mean by the English (that is, we investigated what may be termed their metastereotype; see Vorauer, Main, & O’Connell, 1998). 
We also investigated participants’ beliefs about how they could refute this image. 
In the second study, we manipulated the salience of an English stereotype of the Scots as mean and examined how this affected participants’ depiction of the Scottish in-group. 
In the third and main study, we included a behavioral measure of helping and explored how in-group and out-group helping behaviors were affected by manipulating the salience of an English stereotype of the Scots as mean. 
Our hypotheses (and the studies that address them) are as follows: Hypothesis 1: Young Scots believe that they are viewed as mean by the English, believe that this stereotype is unjustified, are motivated to challenge the stereotype and believe that out-group helping is particularly effective in doing so (Study 1). Hypothesis 2: The more salient the mean metastereotype, the more Scots will seek to present the Scots as generous (Study 2), and (Hypothesis 2a), in particular, the more they will behave helpfully to a third-party out-group (Study 3). STUDY 1 Introduction This is a preliminary investigation to validate the assumptions underpinning our subsequent experimental studies. 
Following Hypothesis 1 above, we wish to show first that Scots believe the English see them as mean, second that they see such a view as unwarranted, third that they are motivated to disconfirm it, and fourth that they view out-group helping as more effective than in-group helping in disconfirming such a stereotype. 
Method Participants Our aim in this study is not to make a claim about the Scots in general and, hence, we do not seek a representative sample drawn from the Scottish population as a whole. 
Rather, we are concerned with the views of the samples from whom the participants in our experiments will be drawn—namely Scottish undergraduate students studying at a Scottish university. 
Hence, this study was conducted using 26 Scottish undergraduates studying at a Scottish university. 
Materials Participants completed a questionnaire that consisted of three elements. 
First, a number of traits were listed including (critically) mean, tight-fisted, naïve, and unrealistic. 
For each trait, participants were asked to rate on a 10-point scale (anchored 1 = not at all and 10 = very much): “To what extent do you think this is characteristic of Scots in general?” The ratings for the traits mean and tight-fisted were correlated (r = .62, p = .001) and averaged into a single score, as were the ratings for naïve and unrealistic (r = .51, p = .01). 
For each trait participants were also asked, “To what extent do you think non-Scots sometimes describe the Scots as being like this?” The ratings for the traits mean and tightfisted were correlated (r = .55, p = .004) and were averaged into a single score, as were the ratings for naïve and unrealistic (r = .79, p = .001). 
Second, participants were given one of two scripts. 
Both purportedly described how the English perceive the Scots. 
One (n = 12) emphasised the meanness of the Scots (mean metastereotype salient); the other (n =14) focussed on alternative negative characteristics (mean metastereotype nonsalient). 
After reading these texts, participants were asked to rate the following on a 10point scale (1 = not at all and 10 = very much): “To what extent do you think this is a fair and accurate description of the Scots?” and “If the English said the Scots were like this, would you feel like acting in ways that prove them wrong?” The texts of the two scripts were as follows: Mean metastereotype salient condition: The negative adjectives most commonly attributed to the Scots were mean, ungenerous, and tight-fisted. 
Similar ideas were apparent in our interviews. 
Thus, one English respondent argued that “perhaps it has to do with their history, I don’t know, but they seem to be an inward-looking society which leads to an attitude of ‘well, I’ll look after myself and my own and let others look after themselves.’” Another said, “You can dress it up as being careful or whatever but basically they are really mean with their money.” Another English respondent argued that the Scots were “amazingly hard-nosed” and that they were so bothered with “balancing the books they go to the mean-spirited, penny-pinching extreme.” She continued, “Everyone knows this—they just go to the extreme and that level of meanness is just silly: Ask anyone.” Mean metastereotype nonsalient condition: The negative adjectives most commonly attributed to the Scots were naïve, unrealistic, and losers. 
Similar ideas were apparent in our interviews. 
Thus, one English respondent argued that “they’ve always had this unrealistic outlook—they squander time and money on romantic sounding schemes which never actually deliver what they are meant to.” Another said, “You can dress it up as being romantic or whatever but basically they are losers who prefer easy gestures to the tough decisions that are needed to make things happen.” Yet another English respondent argued that the Scots were “amazingly naïve” and that they had no idea about the importance of such things as “ensuring what they want is practically possible—they go to the starry-eyed extreme.” She continued, “Everyone knows this—they just go to the extreme and that level of naïvety is just silly: Ask anyone.” In the mean metastereotype salient condition, participants also completed a third element of the questionnaire. 
This consisted of the question “If you wanted to show English people that the stereotype of Scots as mean is unfair and untrue, what sort of behaviors do you think would be most likely to persuade them?” followed by six options, three relating to helping a Scot and three to helping a non-Scot. 
(“Helping a fellow Scot/foreigner in distress.” “Giving money to a charity specifically for people in/outside Scotland.” “Giving up one’s time for a voluntary organization supporting Scots/non-Scots.”) Each was rated on 10-point scales (1 = not at all to 10 = very much). 
The three items referring to helping in-group members were summed (Cronbach’s α=.52), as were the three items referring to out-group helping (Cronbach’s α=.85). 
Because the reliability of the in-group helping scale was weak, we also constructed scales excluding the weakest item. 
The resultant 2-item scales (comprising the items referring to helping someone in distress and to giving to charity) were both reliable (in-group helping Cronbach’s α= .76, out-group Cronbach’s α=.72). 
Results In this study, as in the subsequent studies, all reported p values are two-tailed. 
Trait Ratings Paired t tests showed that participants thought that non-Scots would see Scots as mean or tight-fisted (M = 6.26, SD = 2.24) more than they themselves would (M = 2.98, SD = 1.85), t (24) = –5.58, p < .001, η 2 = .56. 
A similar but weaker pattern was found for the traits naïve and unrealistic. 
Participants thought that non-Scots would see Scots in these terms (M = 4.28, SD = 2.55) more than they themselves did (M = 2.44, SD = 1.54), t (24) = –4.32, p < .001, η 2 = .44. 
When these data were analyzed in a 2 (adjective type: mean or tight-fisted and naïve or unrealistic) × 2 (source of judgment: self and non-Scots) ANOVA, the interaction was significant, F(1, 24) = 6.98, p = .014 (ηp 2 = .23) illustrating that the magnitude of the discrepancy between Scots autostereotypes and metastereotypes was greater for the mean–tight-fisted dimension than the naïve–unrealistic dimension. 
Reactions to the Metastereotype Participants saw both texts as moderately unfair descriptions of the Scots, and there was no difference between them in the degree to which they were rated as fair and accurate depictions (M mean metastereotype nonsalient = 4.57, SD = 2.03 vs. M salient = 3.83, SD = 2.76, t (24) = .79, p = .44). 
Participants were also motivated to prove that both stereotypes were inaccurate with there being no difference between conditions in this motivation (M mean metastereotype nonsalient = 5.50, SD = 2.50 vs. M salient = 6.42, SD = 2.88, t (24) = –.87, p = .39). 
Refuting the Metastereotype When those in the mean metastereotype salient condition were asked what sort of behaviors could refute the image of the Scots as mean, scores on the 3-item scale showed that out-group helping (M = 7.11, SD = 2.18) would be more effective than in-group helping would (M = 4.61, SD = 1.63), t (11) = –3.10, p = .01, η 2 = .47. 
The same pattern was found on the 2-item scale (M out-group helping = 7.08, SD = 2.19, M in-group helping = 4.33, SD = 2.00), t (11) = –3.21, p = .01, η 2 = .48. 
A similar pattern was found on the remaining item excluded from the 2-item scale, (M giving time to a voluntary organization supporting nonScots = 7.17, SD = 2.52, M giving time to a voluntary organization supporting Scots = 5.17, SD = 2.37), t (11) = –2.03, p = .067, η 2 = .27. 
Discussion Three findings from this study are of relevance for our subsequent investigations. 
First, young Scots do indeed believe that the English see them as mean. 
Second, they consider this stereotype unfair and are motivated to refute it. Third, they consider out-group helping more effective than in-group helping in refuting the mean stereotype. 
This study shows the importance of the mean metastereotype for our sample. 
It also shows that young Scots believe out-group helping may be a vehicle with which to demonstrate that Scots are not mean. 
What we need to show now is that manipulating the salience of this metastereotype is consequential and does indeed affect helping behaviors. 
STUDY 2 Introduction This study examines the effects of making the mean metastereotype more or less salient to a sample akin to that used in Study 1. Our prediction (following Hypothesis 2 above) is that where the metastereotype is salient young Scots will emphasize to the English that their group is helpful. 
It is important at this juncture to make explicit a point that thus far has been implicit. 
We have argued that the relationship between metastereotypes and helping is based on a strategic process of communication whereby ingroup members seek to shape what out-group members think of them. 
As such, the process is dependent on the acts of the in-group being visible to the out-group. 
To achieve this we drew on the relationship between the experimenter and participants as a key feature of the experimental context (see Marques, Yzerbyt, & Rijsman, 1988; Reicher & Levine, 1994). 
That is, in Study 2 (and Study 3 as well) the experimenter was English and stressed his interest in finding out what the Scots are like. 
The clear implication was that, in their responses, the Scots participants would be communicating with an influential representative of the English out-group. 
Hence, the conditions are met for in-group members to use helping as a means of attempting to alter out-group stereotypes. 
Method Design The study had one between-subjects factor with two levels. 
The factor was salience of the mean metastereotype (salient vs. nonsalient). 
Participants Thirty Scottish undergraduates attending a Scottish university completed one of two questionnaires. 
One of these failed to complete the answer booklet, so the task resulted in 29 (8 men and 21 women) with usable returns (salient condition n = 14, nonsalient condition n = 15). 
Materials Metastereotype salience was manipulated by getting people either to reflect on English–Scottish differences (intergroup comparison) or to reflect on how the English stereotype the Scots (metastereotype salient condition). 
First, participants completed open-ended questions. 
In the intergroup comparison condition, participants listed three characteristics describing the English and three describing the Scottish. 
In the metastereotype salient condition, participants listed three characteristics that they thought non-Scots commonly used to describe Scots. 
They also highlighted those they thought to be untrue or unfair. 
Second, participants completed a trait-rating task. 
In the intergroup comparison condition, participants rated the extent to which 11 adjectives applied to the English (rated on 7-point scales anchored 1 = not at all, 7 = very much). 
Six adjectives referred to working hard (hardworking, industrious, productive, lazy [reversed], efficient, and organized) and five referred to being mean (mean, tight-fisted, penny-pinching, generous [reversed], and stingy). 
The items on both dimensions formed reliable scales (Cronbach’s α=.73 and .87, respectively). 
In the metastereotype salient condition, participants were asked to indicate the extent to which the English use these adjectives to characterize Scots. 
Again, the items on both the hard working and mean dimensions formed reliable scales (Cronbach’s α=.86 and .84, respectively). 
The open-ended questions and the rating scales constituted the independent variable. 
The dependent measures referred to the Scots’ autostereotype and had two elements. 
First, participants rated the 11 adjectives again, but this time they indicated how much they thought the adjectives applied to Scots. 
Second, they answered the following question: “Per head of population, how much do you think Scots give to charity each year?” This had 9 responses altering in 5% increments from 20% less than the UK average to 20% more than the UK average. 
The midpoint was the same as the UK average. 
This question was designed to provide an opportunity to depict the in-group as generous and is not relevant to exploring the issue of the form of helping (i.e., in-group or out-group). 
The questionnaire also contained items concerning national identity (located at the questionnaire’s beginning to increase the salience of participants’ Scottishness). 
The items were as follows: “This national identity is very important to me.” “This nationality means little to me” (reversed). 
“I feel proud to have this nationality.” “This national identity has no emotional significance for me” (reversed). 
These were answered on 7-point scales (1 = disagree, 7 = agree). 
These items formed a reliable scale (Cronbach’s α=0.89). 
Procedure The two versions of the questionnaire were distributed randomly among students attending a psychology practical class at a Scottish university. 
The class was run by an English lecturer (also the experimenter) whose accent was clearly English. 
He explained that the questionnaires were anonymous but that the class (which included students from a number of other countries, including England) would explore the results. 
Moreover, he stressed that these results would help his research concerning the nature of Scottish identity. 
In this way, the issue of national identity was made salient and it was made explicit that the responses of participants would be subject to out-group scrutiny. 
The questionnaire took approximately 15 minutes to complete. 
After all participants had completed the measures, there was a full debriefing by the experimenter. 
Results Preliminary Analyses Overall, participants generally identified very highly as Scots (on the 7-point scale, M = 5.76, SD = 1.01). 
It was marginally higher in the mean metastereotype nonsalient condition than in the salient condition (M = 6.10, SD = .65 vs. M = 5.39, SD = 1.21), t (27) = 1.98, p = .059. 
Responses to the open-ended questions in the metastereotype salient condition confirmed the importance of the meanness dimension. 
Of the 14 participants, 7 referred to the Scots as being mean. 
Specifically, participants referred to the Scots reputation for being tightfisted or tight with money (listed by 4), stingy (listed by 2) or shrewd with money (listed by 1). One described the Scots as having a reputation for being generous. 
Of the 7 referring to the dimension of meanness, all reported that this was unfair, and it is noteworthy that two made spontaneous reference to Scottish charitable giving. 
One, Hopkins et al. / THE STRATEGIC DIMENSION OF PRO-SOCIAL BEHAVIOR 781 referring to the Scots’s reputation for being tight-fisted, commented that this was “unfair and untrue! 
Generosity is shown a lot by Scottish people—especially for charity/ aid.” The other commented, “The shrewd with money characteristic is clearly a myth as research has proven that Scottish people give more to charity than English people do.” Further evidence as to the nature of the Scots’s metastereotype may be gained from inspecting the traitrating data in the metastereotype condition. 
The scale means show that they thought the English would rate the Scots as moderately hardworking (M = 3.85, SD = .81) and rather mean (M = 4.56, SD = 1.32). 
Scottish Autostereotype On the items related to working hard, there was no effect of condition (M salient condition = 4.80, SD = .57, M nonsalient condition = 4.92, SD = .68; t (27) = .53, p = .60). 
Yet, as predicted, there was an effect of condition on the items related to being mean. 
The Scots were construed as less mean in the mean metastereotype salient condition (M = 2.19, SD = .54) than in the nonsalient condition (M = 3.09, SD = .94), t (22.6) = 3.20, p = .004, η 2 = .31. 
Given that the differences in levels of identification between conditions approached significance, the last analysis was repeated using identity scores as a covariate. 
Taking these scores into account strengthened the effect of condition on the mean autostereotype (F(1, 26) = 14.58, p = 0.01, ηp 2 = .36) with the estimated marginal mean in the metastereotype salient condition being less (M = 2.08) than in the nonsalient condition (M = 3.19). 
Turning to the estimates of charitable giving, these were higher in the mean metastereotype salient condition (M = 6.57, SD = 1.28) than in the nonsalient condition (M = 5.33, SD = 1.88), t (27) = –2.06, p = .049, η 2 = .14. 
Again, this analysis was repeated in an ANOVA taking into account the identity scores. 
As expected, the estimated marginal mean was higher when the metastereotype was salient (M = 6.74) than when it was not (M = 5.18) with this difference being rather stronger than before, F(1, 26) = 6.09, p = 0.02, ηp 2 = .19. 
Discussion These results support our hypothesis (Hypothesis 2) that, when the English metastereotype of Scots as mean is salient, Scots will seek to demonstrate that they are actually generous and helpful. 
They both describe themselves as more generous in general terms (trait ratings) and in terms of concrete instances (estimates of relative charitable giving). 
The metastereotype salience manipulation also had a marginal effect on levels of Scottish identification. 
However, when this effect is controlled for, the effects of condition on the extent to which Scots portray themselves as mean only becomes stronger. 
Thus, it is difficult to explain the findings in terms of a generic cognitive consequence of social identification such as, say, positive in-group differentiation (Tajfel, 1978). 
Indeed, participants described themselves more positively (i.e., as less mean) in the metastereotype salient condition where identity is, if anything, less salient. 
It should be noted that in both conditions participants were directed to think about the relationship between the English and themselves as Scots. 
Hence, our results should not be put down to some other effects of comparative context (such as its effects on the ingroup prototype; Turner et al., 1987) beyond salience of identification. 
Rather, they seem to result from the participants’ thinking about what the English think of them and what they themselves think of these thoughts only in the metastereotype condition. 
It is also noteworthy that the effect of metastereotype salience is obtained only on the mean items and not those relating to working hard. 
This sustains our contention that helping is not so much a means of making the in-group look good in general but rather a means of refuting the specific notion that the in-group is mean. 
However, it is important to note that as we do not measure actual helping behaviors our effects are limited to Scots’ self-descriptions: It is one thing to describe one’s group as generous; it is quite another to give generously. 
Furthermore, we only measure self-descriptions of helping in general. Therefore, we are unable to ascertain whether metastereotype salience affects certain types of helping—notably out-group helping—more than do others (our Hypothesis 2a). 
In our third and final study, we address these limitations. 
Specifically, we explore whether increasing the salience of the mean metastereotype results in higher levels of actual giving to the out-group in particular. 
STUDY 3 In Study 3 we again manipulate the salience of the mean metastereotype but now examine behavioral consequences in terms of actual helping to in-group and outgroup members. 
In this final study, participants are given a text that purportedly describes how they are viewed by the English. 
One version (mean metastereotype salient) stresses that the English see them as mean; the other (mean metastereotype nonsalient) stresses a different flaw—that the English see them as naïve and unrealistic. 
The advantage of this procedure is the greater equivalence between conditions and the greater directness of the manipulation. 
Had we employed such directness in Study 2, it might have led participants to guess the true purpose of the experiment, especially because the dependent measures came immediately after the manipulation (hence it was necessary to have a more indirect manipulation). 
However, in Study 3 the cover story is more elaborate and the dependent measure is, ostensibly, not part of the experiment. 
Hence, even with a direct metastereotype manipulation the relationship to helping remains opaque to participants. 
To recap, we predict that our Scottish participants will be more helpful when they are told that the English think them mean as opposed to naïve, especially where the recipient of help is an out-group member. 
Method Design The design had two between-subjects factors, each with two levels. 
The first was the salience of the mean metastereotype (salient vs. nonsalient). 
The second was the recipient of help (in-group vs. outgroup). 
Participants Participants were 110 undergraduate Scottish students (37 men, 73 women) attending a Scottish university; they participated in return for a course credit. 
Participants (from the same class) took part in the experiment in four groups (each corresponding to one experimental condition). 
The allocation to condition was random. 
The cell sizes were as follows: mean metastereotype salient, ingroup recipient = 27; mean metastereotype salient, outgroup recipient = 30; mean metastereotype nonsalient, in-group recipient = 24; mean metastereotype nonsalient, out-group recipient = 29. Materials The metastereotype was manipulated by giving participants information that supposedly came from a survey conducted by the experimenters concerning how English people viewed the Scots. 
To make the manipulation plausible, it was embedded within text explaining that the English did not see the Scots in completely negative terms (the Scots were also seen as hard working, brave, and conscientious). 
The section containing the manipulation either stressed that the English see the Scots as mean or as naïve. 
These texts are identical to those in Study 1. The manipulation of the recipient of help was contained in an appeal from a (fictional) charity working with victims of violent crime. 
In the in-group conditions, the charity was called Support Scottish Victims of Violence and the relevant materials contained a Scottish flag. 
In the out-group conditions, the charity was called Support Welsh Victims of Violence and the relevant materials contained a Welsh flag. 
The dependent variable was the amount of helping volunteered. 
Helping was measured using two behavioral indexes. 
Participants had to indicate, first, how many raffle tickets (priced 10p—roughly 17 cents— each) they would buy from the fictional charity and, second, how many books of tickets (containing 10 tickets each) they would sell. 
Participants completed three additional measures. 
The first was a scale of Scottish identification (four items answered on 7-point scales, Cronbach’s α=.92). 
The second was an autostereotype scale. 
This included seven items related to being mean: “Scots are generous.” “Scots are helpful.” “Scots are charitable.” “Scots are mean” (reversed). 
“The Scottish are generally helpful people.” “The Scottish will put themselves out for anybody in need.” “The Scots have a strong sense of responsibility toward other people in general.” These were answered on 7-point scales (1 = not at all, 7 = extremely; Cronbach’s α= .83). 
The third addressed whether people recalled the manipulation of the metastereotype correctly. 
It asked, “What negative Scottish characteristic did the English comment on?” In each condition, participants were given four response options: the correct answer (salient condition: ungenerous; nonsalient condition: naïve), a synonym of the correct answer (salient condition: penny pinching; nonsalient condition: trusting), and two semantically incorrect answers (salient condition: contempt for others and disrespectful; nonsalient condition: idealistic and impractical). 
Procedure The study was introduced as exploring group processes and memory. 
Participants were told that the researchers were studying Scottish people’s memories for what the English thought about them. 
Both researchers were English and, as they were not attached to the university in which the study was being conducted, were able to present themselves as visitors from an English university. 
An English member of staff working in the participants’ department (hereafter, “host”) introduced the researchers. 
The researchers explained they were studying English people’s images of Scots and had come to Scotland to meet some “real-life” Scots because this would help their research. 
They explained they would present their findings concerning the English stereotype of Scots that would be followed by a memory test that would be scored by the researchers. 
Each participant was given a response booklet entitled Group Processes and Memory Performance. 
English Views of Scots: Recall Test and bearing colored pictures of the Scottish and English flags. 
Participants identified themselves by recording their group name (“Scottish”) and an individual number. 
The booklet contained all the texts and memory test items. 
Participants were allowed 90 seconds to digest the metastereotype information (which varied according to condition). 
After a further 120 seconds, they completed the recall test. This not only maintained the cover story but contained a question to check their memory for how they were seen by the English. 
Following the test, the researchers collected the answer booklets and, leaving the room, explained they would return after marking participants’ memory performance. 
They apologized that that this would take 10 minutes and, following a previously arranged script, the host replied that this was alright because a postgraduate student had asked to make an announcement that could conveniently happen now. 
After the experimenters left, a confederate entered and explained that she had completed an MSc in Cardiff, Wales, and was now pursuing this work for a PhD in Scotland. 
She explained that her PhD concerned people’s experiences of coping with crimes such as being attacked in bars or clubs and described her involvement in a victim support group. 
In the in-group helping conditions, the confederate described her current work as relating to the experience of crime in Scotland. 
In the out-group helping conditions, she described her current work in identical terms except that it related to the experience of crime in Wales. 
In all conditions the confederate explained she was helping the victim support group raise money through a raffle. 
Tickets were priced at 10p each with prizes including wine, CDs, etc. 
Participants were asked to volunteer to buy and sell these tickets, and each was given a form to show how many tickets they would personally buy and how many books of tickets they would be willing to sell (although it was stressed that help was entirely voluntary). 
Participants were told that there was not time to collect money or hand out raffle booklets so those volunteering would be contacted later. 
After the appeal, the postgraduate confederate claimed to have to leave for another appointment, and the host explained that she (the host) would gather the forms. 
This allowed the experimenters to match the volunteering form with the participants’ questionnaires. 
Furthermore, as the host was English and working with the English experimenters, this arrangement implied that participants’ helping would be visible to an English audience. 
Following completion of the volunteering forms, the researchers returned. 
Although they claimed to have marked the tests, the scores reported were contrived and varied between 78% and 82%. 
After participants received their scored booklet, they completed another questionnaire concerning their level of Scottish identification and their Scottish autostereotype. 
Once completed, each participant’s answer booklet, helping form, and identification questionnaire were placed into an individual envelope. 
Participants were told that the experiment was finished and then took part in a structured debrief. 
Results Preliminary Analyses Manipulation check. 
Participants’ recall of the metastereotype manipulation was investigated through exploring responses to the question “What negative Scottish characteristic did the English comment on?” Participants were accurate in their answers. 
In the mean metastereotype salient conditions, all 56 participants chose either the correct response or its synonym (correct, ingroup recipient = 17; correct, out-group recipient = 19; synonym, in-group recipient = 10; synonym, out-group recipient = 10). 
In the mean metastereotype nonsalient conditions, all 53 participants chose the correct response. 
Identification. 
Participants’ identification as Scottish was highly skewed toward the high end of the 7-point scale (mode = 7, MDN = 6.5, M = 6.0, SD = 1.27, skewness = –1.65, kurtosis = 2.40). 
As there was not enough variation to analyse the effect of level of identification, we restricted our analyses to high identifiers because this is the sample for which we expected the metastereotype manipulation to be consequential. We used a criterion score of 5.5 for high identifiers because it is the point at which, more often than not, people express strong agreement with statements about their identification. 
This led to the inclusion of 88 participants (29 men, 59 women). 
The resultant cell sizes were as follows: mean metastereotype salient, in-group recipient = 21; mean metastereotype, out-group recipient = 23; mean metastereotype nonsalient, in-group recipient = 20; mean metastereotype nonsalient, out-group recipient = 24. Levels of identification were extremely high in all conditions: M mean metastereotype salient, in-group recipient = 6.51 (SD = .48); M mean metastereotype salient, out-group recipient = 6.62 (SD = .43); M mean metastereotype nonsalient, in-group recipient = 6.45 (SD = .54); M mean metastereotype nonsalient, out-group recipient = 6.59 (SD = .47). 
Analysis revealed no effects of condition. 
Helping. 
The raffle-ticket buying data were not normally distributed. 
For the 88 high identifiers, the numbers volunteering to buy tickets were as follows: 0 tickets = 20; 1 ticket = 1; 3 tickets = 1; 5 tickets = 12; 10 tickets = 37; 20 tickets = 11; 30 tickets = 3; 50 tickets = 3 (skewness = 2.051, kurtosis = 5.476). 
The rafflebook selling data were even more non-normally distributed: 0 books = 63; 1 book = 2; 2 books = 3; 3 books = 2; 4 books = 1; 5 books = 6; 10 books = 8; 20 books = 2; 50 books = 1 (skewness = 4.998, kurtosis = 31.990). 
We suspect that the large number refusing to sell tickets reflects the multidimensional nature of the task: It involves approaching others, asking for and collecting money and so forth, and it requires complex social skills and a sense of efficacy as well as a willingness to help. 
This implies that raffle ticket selling is a poor measure and so our analyses focus instead on the raffle-ticket buying data. 
This decision receives support if we investigate the number who volunteered to sell raffle tickets but who did not offer to buy tickets. 
Of 88, only 2 fall into this category, which suggests that in disregarding the selling data we are not overlooking a significant form of helping (for information, the numbers falling in the other categories are as follows: neither volunteering to buy nor sell = 18; offering to buy but not sell = 45; offering to both buy and sell = 23). 
Hypothesis Testing Raffle-ticket buying. 
Given the distribution of the raffle ticket buying data, we subjected these data to a square root transformation. 
This resulted in data much more suitable for ANOVA (skewness = .038, kurtosis = –.077). 
The condition means for the original and the transformed data are reported in Table 1. Analysis of the transformed data in a 2 (metastereotype: mean vs. naïve) × 2 (recipient: in-group vs. outgroup) ANOVA revealed no main effect of metastereotype salience, F(1, 84) = 3.38, p = .070, ηp 2 =.039, an effect of recipient, F(1, 84) = 4.30, p = .041, ηp 2 = .049, and most important, an interaction, F(1, 84) = 4.06, p = .047, ηp 2 =.046. 
As expected, the metastereotype manipulation did not have an impact when the recipient was in-group (M mean = 2.23, M naïve = 2.29) but did when the recipient was out-group (M mean = 3.71, M naïve = 2.31), t (45) = 2.80, p = .007, η 2 = .149. 
Indeed, the level of helping when the metastereotype was salient and the recipient was outgroup was higher than that found when the recipient was in-group regardless of metastereotype salience (M mean metastereotype salient, out-group recipient = 3.71 vs. M mean metastereotype salient, in-group recipient = 2.23, t (42) = –2.83, p = .007, η 2 = .160; M mean metastereotype salient, out-group recipient = 3.71 vs. M mean metastereotype nonsalient, in-group recipient = 2.29, t (41) = –2.68, p = .011, η 2 = .149). 
These results were also obtained when the original (nontransformed data) are analyzed either by ANOVA or nonparametric procedures. 
1 Other measures. 
The condition means for the autostereotype measure (a higher score = more generous) were as follows: M mean metastereotype salient, in-group recipient = 5.12, SD = .65; M mean metastereotype salient, out-group recipient = 5.06, SD = .67; M mean metastereotype nonsalient, in-group recipient = 5.23, SD = .66; M mean metastereotype nonsalient, out-group recipient = 4.80, SD = .69. 
Neither of the main effects for mean metastereotype salience or the recipient of helping were significant, nor was the interaction (F(1, 82 ) = .27, p = .60; F(1, 82 ) = 2.99, p = .087; F(1, 82 ) = 1.66, p = .202, respectively). 
Discussion The results from this study support both Hypothesis 2 and Hypothesis 2a. When the mean metastereotype is salient, participants express higher levels of helping toward out-group members but not toward in-group members. 
The finding is all the more powerful because we are not using estimations of intention to help but rather what participants believe to be genuine acts of giving to charity. 
When we revealed to participants that the person making the charitable appeal was, in fact, a confederate, there was genuine surprise. 
Not one person mentioned any doubts over the genuineness of the appeal. At first sight, there may seem to be an anomaly between Studies 2 and 3. In this study, unlike the last, we found no effect of metastereotype salience on the Scottish autostereotype. 
However, in Study 2, the autostereotype TABLE 1: Study 3, raffle tickets bought (original and transformed data) for high-identifying Scottish participants: means (and standard deviations) Help Offered In-Group Out-Group Nonsalient Salient Nonsalient Salient Number of raffle tickets bought Original data 7.90 (6.83) 7.67 (10.53) 7.92 (7.06) 16.74 (13.37) Transformed data 2.29 (1.67) 2.23 (1.68) 2.31 (1.64) 3.71 (1.77) is the only tool through which participants can communicate their helpfulness. 
In Study 3, participants can demonstrate their helpfulness much more vividly and directly through acts of giving. 
Whether this explanation is valid or not, the lack of difference on this measure means that one cannot put variations in the level of helping down to differences in the content of the in-group autostereotype. 
Equally, the fact that our revised manipulation of metastereotype salience did not produce any differences between conditions in Scottish identification means that the results cannot be put down to levels of identification per se. This leaves an explanation in terms of metastereotype salience. 
It is true that we have no direct measure of this construct and, hence, no analysis to show that it accounts for the effect of our manipulation on helping. 
However, any direct test of mean metastereotype salience would create serious problems of reactivity. 
Getting people to think and respond explicitly about how the English see them, one would invoke notions of meanness that might not otherwise have come to mind. 
This is not simply a measurement issue. 
Such a check would undermine the manipulation by rendering salient the Scots’s reputation for meanness in all conditions. 
Our analysis of the recall items relating to the manipulation shows that participants could at least access the mean metastereotype in the salient condition. 
Moreover, the act of endorsing the mean or penny-pinching terms renders the metastereotype more salient. 
Although the accessibility of the naïve metastereotype in the nonsalient conditions does not, in and of itself, show that meanness was not accessible, recent work on retrieval-induced forgetting (e.g., MacLeod & Macrae, 2001; Saunders & MacLeod, 2002) suggests that the very act of recalling an alternative aspect of the metastereotype can be expected to inhibit access to the mean metastereotype. 
In other words, in measurement terms, the memory findings are consonant with our assumptions about salience and, in process terms, our check serves to strengthen rather than weaken the manipulation. 
However, the strength of an explanation in terms of the salience of the mean metastereotype lies not only in our ability to measure the construct itself but also in its theoretical ability to account for the pattern of results as a whole. 
These results show that, relatively speaking, the manipulation of metastereotype salience affects outgroup helping but not in-group helping. 
Furthermore, they show that when the mean metastereotype is salient the level of helping is greater when the recipient is outgroup rather than in-group. 
Given that so much of the literature suggests that helping depends on in-group inclusion, the finding that out-group helping can be raised so as to surpass in-group helping might seem quite perplexing. 
But what is anomalous in terms of traditional social cognitive explanations can be understood in terms of an approach that is sensitive to strategic considerations. 
For this approach, the issue is what forms of behavior best communicate the desired message to the relevant audience, and it may be that forms of behavior that might least be expected are the most powerful communicative tools. 
That is, the improbability of out-group helping is what renders it strategically effective as a means of demonstrating one’s helpfulness. 
There is one additional strand to this argument. 
It will be recalled from Study 1 that the texts for the metastereotype salient and nonsalient conditions did not differ in the extent to which they were rated as unfair by young Scots nor in the extent to which these Scots were motivated to refute them. 
That is, both texts were seen as equally negative and the fact that, in Study 3, effects are unique to the metastereotype salient condition suggests that out-group helping is less a response to negative metastereotypes in general. It is more a specific act of communication that has potency in refuting the specific accusation of meanness. 
CONCLUSION Over three studies we have shown (a) that Scots believe they are seen as mean by the English, that they resent this stereotype, are motivated to refute it and believe out-group helping is the most effective way of doing so; (b) that increasing the salience of the mean metastereotype leads young Scots to accentuate the extent to which they describe Scottish people as generous; and (c) that it also leads to helping directed to out-group members. 
Our results, therefore, support our hypotheses and the notion that people seek to use helping behaviors as a means of refuting specific negative metastereotypes provides a compelling explanation of these results. 
Future research could usefully extend this thinking. 
First, it may well be true that out-group helping is not used to challenge negative metastereotypes in general but rather that the specific meanings associated with this helping are used to refute specific out-group stereotypes. 
However, that doesn’t mean that these meanings are only potent in disproving accusations of meanness. 
Drawing on the Bulgarian example as outlined in the introduction, out-group helping may also refute (and, hence, be invoked by) accusations that the in-group is uncivilized. 
Are there other metastereotypes that invoke helping and, moreover, does the type of accusation also affect the type of helping offered? 
For example, it might be that helping the weak and oppressed could be especially important in relation to uncivilized metastereotypes. 
Second, are there limit conditions to the impact of a mean metastereotype on helping? 
Is this impact sensitive to the extent to which in-group members are visible to the out-group (as we suggest) and to such factors as the power of the out-group to impose consequences upon the in-group? 
Third, whereas it may well be true that in-group members increase outgroup helping to refute the mean metastereotype, we could investigate whether this is actually effective in changing such stereotypes. 
However, for the present it is appropriate to underline the significance of the present studies as they stand—not least that they show how in-group identification is linked to out-group helping. 
More generally, this work has implications for understanding both the strategic dimension to group processes and the nature of helping behavior. 
As concerns the former, we provide further evidence for the utility of explanations that imply that some behaviors may be acts of communication intended to ameliorate the position of the in-group in an intergroup context. 
For example, Study 3 provides evidence that phenomena traditionally viewed as being determined by internal cognitive representations may be better viewed as strategic acts of communication. 
Helping is not simply an outcome of identity processes but can be an active intervention into these processes. 
As concerns the issue of helping, there is a simple yet important implication to be drawn. 
As argued at the outset, it is generally assumed that people who help must be concerned with the fate of others. 
Hence, what we need to explain is why people should be so concerned. 
Our work adds to a literature with origins in early anthropological investigations that implies that providing for others may reflect concerns over one’s own collective interests. 
This work cautions that research into prosocial behavior must avoid the old fallacy of inferring the motivations of the actor from the observer’s definition of the act. 
People may be seen to do good to their fellow creatures without having anything remotely God-like about their dispositions. 
NOTE 1. When the original (nontransformed) raffle-ticket buying data (available in Table 1) were analyzed in a 2 (metastereotype: mean vs. naïve) × 2 (recipient: in-group vs. out-group) ANOVA, we found main effects for metastereotype salience, F(1, 84) = 4.15, p = .045, ηp 2 =.047, and recipient, F(1, 84) = 4.64, p = .034, ηp 2 = .052. 
The interaction was also significant, F(1, 84) = 4.61, p = .035, ηp 2 =.052. 
As predicted, the metastereotype manipulation had no impact when the recipient was in-group, M mean = 7.67, M naïve = 7.90, but had a clear impact when the recipient was out-group, M mean = 16.74, M naïve = 7.92, t (33.07) = 2.81, p = .008. 
Again, the level of helping when the metastereotype was salient and the recipient was out-group, M = 16.74, was higher than that found when the recipient was ingroup and the mean metastereotype salient, M = 7.67, t (42) = –2.49, p = .017, or when the recipient was in-group and the mean metastereotype nonsalient, M = 7.90, t (33.67) = –2.67, p = .009. 
To confirm these findings, we reanalysed these (nontransformed) data using nonparametric tests. 
A Kruskal-Wallis test across the four cells showed an overall effect of condition, χ 2 (3) = 11.72, p = .008. 
Further comparisons (Mann-Whitney) confirmed that the Welsh appeal received more help when the Scots’s reputation for meanness was prominent than when it was not, U = 160.0, Z = –2.59, p = .01. 
Also, there was more buying when the recipient was Welsh and the mean metastereotype was salient than when the recipient was Scottish and the metastereotype salient, U = 118.0, Z = –2.99, p = .003, or when the recipient was Scottish and the metastereotype nonsalient, U = 134.5, Z = –2.41, p = .016. 
REFERENCES Allport, G. (1954). 
The nature of prejudice. 
Boston: Beacon. 
Being mean: From thrifty to frugal. (n.d.). 
Retrieved June 21, 2006, from http://www.scotweb.co.uk/underthekilt/beingmean.html Branscome, N., Ellemers, N., Spears, R., & Doosje, B. (1999). 
The context and content of social identity threat. 
In N. Ellemers, R. Spears, & B. Doosje (Eds.), Social identity (pp. 
35-58). 
Oxford, UK: Blackwell. 
Bryan, J. H., & Test, M. A. (1967). 
Models and helping: naturalistic studies in aiding behavior. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 6, 400-407. 
Darley, J. M., Teger A. I., & Lewis L. D. (1973). 
Do groups always inhibit individuals’ responses to potential emergencies? 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 26, 395-399. 
Dovidio, J. F., Gaertner, S. L., Validizic, A., Matoka, K., Johnson, B., & Frazier, S. (1997). 
Extending the benefit of recategorisation: Evaluations, self-disclosure, and helping. 
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 33, 401-442. 
Genov, R., & Baeva, I. (2003). 
“Incomprehension of the nature of the race question”: Saving the Bulgarian Jews from the Holocaust. In G. Halfdanarson (Ed.), Racial discrimination and ethnicity in European history (pp. 
153-176). 
Pisa, Italy: Edizioni Plus, Pisa University Press. 
Hopkins, N., & Moore, C. (2001). 
Categorising the neighbors: Identity, distance and stereotyping. 
Social Psychology Quarterly, 64, 239-252. 
Horowitz, I. A. (1971). 
The effect of group norms on bystander intervention. 
Journal of Social Psychology, 83, 265-273. 
Klein, O., & Azzi, A. E. (2001). 
The strategic confirmation of metastereotypes: How group members attempt to tailor an out-group’s representation of themselves. 
British Journal of Social Psychology, 40, 279-293. 
Klein, O., Spears, R., & Reicher, S. (in press). 
Social identity performance: Extending the strategic side of SIDE. 
Personality and Social Psychology Review. 
Latané, B., & Nida, S. (1981). 
Ten years of research on group size and helping. 
Psychological Bulletin, 89, 308-324. 
Levine, M., Cassidy, C., Brazier, G., & Reicher, S. (2002). 
Selfcategorization and bystander non-intervention: Two experimental studies. 
Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 32, 1452-1463. 
Levine, M., Prosser, A., Evans, D., & Reicher, S. (2005). 
Identity and emergency intervention: How social group membership and inclusiveness of group boundaries shapes helping behavior. 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 31, 443-453. 
MacLeod, M. D., & Macrae, C. N. (2001). 
Gone but not forgotten: The transient nature of retrieval-induced forgetting. 
Psychological Science, 12, 148-152. 
Malinowski, B. (1922). 
Argonauts of the Western Pacific. 
London: Routledge. 
Marques, J. M., Yzerbyt, V. Y., & Rijsman, J. B. (1988). 
Context effects on inter-group discrimination: In-group bias as a function of experimenter’s provenance. 
British Journal of Social Psychology, 27, 301-318. 
Mauss, M. (1954). 
The gift: Forms and functions of exchange in archaic societies. 
Glencoe, IL: Free Press. 
(Originally published 1907) Nadler, A. (2002). 
Inter-group helping relations as power relations: Helping relations as affirming or challenging inter-group hierarchy. 
Journal of Social Issues, 58, 487-502. 
788 PERSONALITY AND SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY BULLETIN Nadler, A., & Halabi, S. (2006). 
Inter-group helping as status relations: Effects of status stability, identification and type of help on receptivity to high status group’s help. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 91, 97-110. 
Reicher, S. D., & Hopkins, N. (2001). 
Self and nation: Categorization, contestation and mobilization. 
London: Sage. 
Reicher, S. D., & Levine, M. (1994). 
De-individuation, power relations between groups and the expression of social identity: The effects of visibility to the out-group. 
British Journal of Social Psychology, 33, 145-163. 
Reicher, S. D., Spears, R., & Postmes, T. (1995). 
A social identity model of de-individuation phenomena. 
European Review of Social Psychology, 6, 161-198. 
Reicher, S. D., Cassidy, C., Wolpert, I., Hopkins, N., & Levine, M. (2006). 
Saving Bulgaria’s Jews: An analysis of social identity and social solidarity. 
European Journal of Social Psychology, 36, 49-72. 
Richardson, S. (1742). 
Pamela: Or, virtue rewarded (3rd ed.). 
London: Rivington and Osborn. 
Rutkowski, G. K., Gruder, C. L., & Romer, D. (1983). 
Group cohesiveness, social norms, and bystander intervention. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 44, 545-552. 
Saunders, J., & MacLeod, M. D. (2002). 
New evidence on the suggestibility of memory: The role of retrieval-induced forgetting in eyewitness misinformation effects. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 8, 127-142. 
Simon, B., Stürmer, S., & Steffens, K. (2000). 
Helping individuals or group members? 
The role of individual and collective identification in AIDS volunteerism. 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 26, 496-506. 
Stürmer, S., Snyder, M., & Omoto, A. M. (2005). 
Prosocial emotions and helping: The moderating role of group membership. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 88, 532-546. 
Tajfel, H. (1978). 
Differentiation between social groups. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Turner, J. C., Hogg, M. A., Oakes, P. J., Reicher, S. D., & Wetherell, M. C. (1987). 
Rediscovering the social group: A self-categorisation theory. 
Oxford, UK: Basil Blackwell. 
Vorauer, J. D., Main, K. J., & O’Connell, G. B. (1998). 
How do individuals expect to be viewed by members of lower status groups? 
Content and implications of meta-stereotypes. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 917-937. 
Received June 26, 2006 Revision accepted November 3, 2006 at Bar-Ilan university on July 6, 2014psp.sagepub.comDownloaded from 