1. Introduction In the end of his broad review on the research on organizational learning, Huber (1991) concludes that research has not been able to create any guidelines to increase the effectiveness of organizational learning. 
After Huber, many other researchers have expressed their frustration on the fragmented state of the theory and the lack of practical value of the results of research on organizational learning (Pentland, 1995; Jones, 1995; Hendry, 1996; Tsang, 1997). 
The inadequate state of research is not a problem for academic researchers alone. 
Practicing managers, consultants and members of organizations increasingly face * Corresponding author. 
E-mail addresses: jaakko.virkkunen@helsinki.fi (J. Virkkunen), kari.kuutti@oulu.fi (K. Kuutti). 
0959-8022/00/$ - see front matter  2000 Elsevier Science Ltd. 
All rights reserved. 
problems in mastering organizational learning and transformations with the traditional conceptual tools of management (Robey, Wishart & Rodriguez-Diaz, 1995). 
Stewart (1993) estimated a few years back the failure rate of business process reengineering efforts to be as high as 70%. 
Beer, Eisenstat and Spector (1990) found in their study that organizational change programs fail astonishingly often. 
The fragmented state of theory carries over to prescriptions and intervention practices. 
Instead of analyzing the specific demands of the situation, “most practitioners carry a hammer and assume the presence of nails” (Edmondson, 1996). 
Many attempts have been made to identify the root causes of the problems and to show a way forward. 
The vagueness of the key concept “organization” seems to be a major hindrance to progress (Schmidt, 1994). 
Researchers have tried to cope with this problem in different ways. 
Some base their argument on mentalistic analogies of individual learning (see Huber, 1991; Dodgson, 1993; Jones, 1995). 
Others, although speaking about “organizational learning”, focus on a more limited unit of analysis within an organization such as a management team or an organizational routine or then concentrate only on a specific aspect of the organization for instance its corporate culture. 
Some writers propose that other concepts, such as “knowledge system” (Pentland, 1995), “community of practice” (Brown & Duguid, 1991; Hendry, 1996) or “activity system” (Blackler, 1993; Løwendahl & Haanes, 1997) should be used in analyzing organizational learning. 
In this article, we shall line up with those writers who are trying to find a more fruitful unit of analysis for studying organizational learning. 
Because of the inadequacy of the basic concept, the research has produced insights about different mechanisms and obstacles of organizational learning, but not much knowledge about the relationships between the identified mechanisms and obstacles. 
We find, however, that there is another, even more fundamental cause for the lack of progress in the research on organizational learning: the tendency to analyze the problem in universalistic, ahistorical terms. 
1 We maintain that organizational learning is a cultural process which changes in the course of history. 
The activities in organizations, the problems in realizing these activities, the possible means of solving the problems, as well as the obstacles of learning, are historically specific. 
They are determined by the local and historical form of the activity and the available cultural means of solving the problems. 
We cannot proceed in understanding organizational learning without analyzing concretely the historical development of both the problems to be mastered, and the possible mechanisms of learning. 
Even the fact that organizational learning has become a central problem in management and organization research is best understood from a historical perspective. 
In the first half of this century, the development of organizations was realized largely by applying the novel ideas of rational scientific analysis and planning, “scientific 1 There has been astonishingly little connection between the discussion and research on organizational learning, on one hand, and the macroeconomic analyses of the ongoing change of economic conditions or sociological studies of the ongoing cultural change and transformation of work (e.g. 
Hirschhorn, 1986; Zuboff, 1988; Reich, 1991) or historical studies of organizational learning (e.g. 
Chandler, 1961; Hughes, 1979), on the other hand. 
management”. 
This approach to developing activities stood in sharp contradiction to the historically preceding craft type of experiential learning. 
In the literature of organizational learning, we do not, however, find analyses of the remarkable triumphs of organizational learning that was realized by applying the principles of rational management. 
Organizational learning became a problem only when the limits of the rational management approach began to emerge and managers and organizations failed when applying those principles. 
The objective of this paper is to show how the concrete historical analysis can help us understand the learning problems and effectively intervene in the learning process. 
We shall make the following two claims: 1. Organizational learning is a multifaceted and multiphased phenomenon, a complex interplay between different elements of a system. 
It cannot be studied by reducing the scope to one or another element, but a minimal meaningful system as a whole should be taken as the unit of analysis and intervention. 
2. Organizational learning is always local and situational: structures, practices, habits and ways of thinking in an organization are all shaped and produced in the historical development of that particular organization. 
Transformation from the current situation to a new one cannot be done without a historical perspective. 
2 We shall first analyze some prominent examples of the approaches used in studying organizational learning and their underlying theoretical assumptions. 
We shall then present a conceptualization based on the cultural historical theory of activity and finally show, in a case example, how this theory can be used to explain and direct a special kind of organizational learning called “expansive learning” (Engestro¨m, 1987; Cole & Engestro¨m, 1993). 
2. Frameworks and concepts used in the analysis of organizational learning 2.1. 
The need for an integrating unit of analysis One of the basic practices in science is to analyze a phenomenon by dividing it into elements and by studying these separately. 
When dealing with a multifaceted and dynamic phenomenon this approach, however, will easily lead to distortions. 
As Vygotsky (1962, pp. 3–5) has pointed out, we do not learn anything about the qualities of water, for example, its ability to extinguish fire, by studying separately its constituent elements oxygen and hydrogen, the former of which is a necessary element in all burning and the latter of which is an explosive gas. 
The proper unit of analysis is the water molecule. 
Analogously, we should not hope to learn to under2 We believe that BPR’s need for a “clean slate” as the starting point is explained by the lack of instruments in this approach to facilitate the transformation process (see Virkkunen, Kuutti & Young, 1997). 
stand organizational learning by analyzing separately individual learning and the changes in institutional structures, cognitive changes and development of cultural artifacts or incremental development and revolutionary transformations of organizations. 
This, however, is just what many of the theories in the field attempt to do. In the next section, we shall describe the units of analysis as used by some theories of organizational learning that we think represent the main approaches in the field. 
By contrasting these different approaches we try to demonstrate the need for an integrating unit of analysis. 
2.2. 
Rational action approach: organizational learning as changes in management’s assumptions Amy C. Edmondson (1996) has analyzed the core of three theories of organizational intervention, which all ascribe organizational learning to changes in a management team’s cognition. 
These theories are Edgar Schein’s (1990, 1992) theory of corporate culture, Chris Argyris’ (1982, 1985) theory of interpersonal competence and Peter Senge’s (1990) theory of systems thinking that is based on Jay Forrester’s (1961, 1971) theory of system dynamics. 
Besides concentrating on the management team’s cognition, these theories have a number of other common assumptions. 
The theories focus on an obstacle of rational action and collective learning. 
For Schein (1990, 1992, 1996) the obstacle is created by contradictions in the taken-forgranted assumptions that are embedded in the deep, mostly unconscious layers of corporate culture, or contradictions and lack of dialogue between the three occupational cultures that meet in organizations: the operators’, engineers’ and managers’ cultures. 
For Argyris the obstacle is created by the governing competitive values of organizational life that lead individual managers to adopt dysfunctional action strategies, which create defensive communication and prevent collective learning. 
For Senge and Forrester the obstacle is the managers’ inability to understand complex systemic relations and mediated, long term effects of their decisions. 
All these theories also assume a set of factors that prevent the actor from becoming aware of the counterproductive nature of their taken-for-granted cognition. 
According to the theories, once the obstacles of rational discussion and learning are recognized and removed, the managers and the whole organization will begin to act more rationally and learn effectively. 
Schein’s, Argyris’ and Senge’s approaches focus on cognition leaving the administrative structures, as well as tools and other artifacts used in the activity, outside the analysis. 
For Schein and Argyris organizational learning is a result of the quality of the managers’ interaction processes. 
These, they assume, can safely be analyzed and developed without considering the content of the activity — a hypothesis that lacks empirical substantiation (Kaplan, 1979). 
Forrester and Senge, on the contrary, see the problem, not in the processes as such, but in the content: the managers have false assumptions about the causal relations in the systems they try to manage (Edmondson, 1996, pp. 578–582). 
Their intervention strategy also differs from that of Argyris and Schein; they use models of the systems’ dynamics as tools for collective thinking and learning. 
2.3. 
Behavioral framework: learning as refinement of routines Economists’ early conceptualizations of organizational learning were based on the idea of learning by doing and the concept of the learning curve (Arrow, 1962; Yelle, 1979; Epple, Argoyte & Devadas, 1991), which seem to take the production process implicitly as the basic unit of analysis. 
The analysis focused on the improvements in the production parameters (unit costs, amount of errors, etc.) as a function of time of the production or the number of units produced. 
The mechanisms of learning in production were not studied. 
Levitt and March (1988) have elaborated upon this idea. 
On the basis of behavioral studies of an organization, they maintain that, contrary to the rationalistic theories, action in organizations stems from a logic of appropriateness or legitimacy more than a logic of consequentiality or intention; it is based on historically formed routines that are incrementally developed. 
Organizations learn by encoding inferences from history into routines that guide individuals’ behavior. 
The experiential lessons of history, won through trials and errors and conscious search for better solutions, are preserved in the routines. 
The routines are transmitted to new individuals through socialization. 
These learn the routines, but not necessarily the historical causes of their specific form. 
Levitt and March seem to capture the special organizational nature of the learning processes they study with the concept of routine. 
The concept incorporates both the material and non-material cultural artifacts used in realizing the “routine”. 
It explains, in a natural way, how experience and knowledge are preserved and transferred to new individuals. 
It does not, however, help us to understand the purposeful, cooperative learning activity neither does it explain the deep qualitative changes and transformations of routines. 
This, we think, is due to the lack of clarification of the interaction between the actors, the routine and the objects processed in the routine as well as the outcome of the routine. 
We agree with Levitt and March in their critique against the rationalistic theories of organization, but we think that by criticizing the simplistic rational models they fail to give proper attention to the social meaning of the routines and the values created by them. 
2.4. 
Organizational learning as a process in “communities of practice” The search for the “best practices” has also directed the discussion of organizational learning to the search of universal mechanisms and solutions, independent of content and local contingencies of learning. 
The new findings concerning the nature of knowledge and learning have, however, emphasized the local and embedded nature of learning processes (see Blackler, 1993; Brown & Duguid, 1991; Tyre & von Hippel, 1993). 
These findings show the limits of the best practice approach and pose the practical question: how can managers and consultants direct the learning and development processes if there is no best practice to follow? 
John Seely Brown and Paul Duguid find that organizations comprise of several “communities of practice” that often cross the formal boundaries of organizational units. 
They argue that organizational learning should be studied by analyzing how these networked communities of practice create new insights, and learn (Brown & Duguid, 1991). 
The actual learning in the practice differs remarkably from what the managers and planners of personnel training seem to assume. 
Brown and Duguid base their argument, to a great extent, on Orr’s (1990) ethnographic research on copier repairer’s work. 
Orr found out that the official algorithmic prescriptions for the work, instead of helping the repairers to do their work, in some cases, made it more difficult. 
The official directives and training depicted the work as straightforward and simple, while in fact it was complex and demanding. 
To compensate the inadequacy of the official prescriptions and to master the work the repairers relied on each other’s experiences, which they shared and preserved in the form of case stories. 
As a unit of analysis, the concept “community of practice” has partly the same elements as the concept of “routine”. 
There are, however, some important differences. 
Brown’s and Duguid’s concept focuses attention on the actors’ actual interactions and the ways in which the practitioners in the community of practice master collectively a task by transmitting knowledge and experiences to its members. 
The concept of routine, as Levitt and March describe it, does not emphasize the mastery of the task. 
The “community of practice” brings the actors more prominently in the picture and focuses attention on the work at the grass root level. 
The official way of conceiving the “organization”, is problematized: the relevant cooperative relations do not follow the organization chart. 
The identification of the community of practice, the subject of learning, is for Brown and Duguid an empirical question. 
Despite its merits, Brown’s and Duguid’s concept has the same fundamental limitation as the concept of routine. 
The concept does not help us understand, why a community of practice exists in the first place, or why communities of practice sometimes break up or transform radically. 
In stressing the inadequacy of the official directives and the creative problem-solving in the community of practice, Brown and Duguid fail to see that Orr’s study has depicted a historically specific form of interaction between the planners and doers and a historically specific mediating artifact used in this interaction, the algorithmic prescription. 
Because of this, they see the experiential learning in the community of practice as the only possibility for learning, and do not consider the possibility of any alternative, more fruitful forms of interaction between the planners and doers. 
They do not consider the possibilities for a creative dialogue between abstract and concrete thinking, which, for instance Ikujiro Nonaka (1988, 1991) sees as the crux of organizational learning. 
According to Nonaka, the dialogue between the top management’s abstract, visionary concepts, and the experience-grounded concepts originating on the shop floor, is essential for organizational learning. 
He stresses the central role of the middle management as a mediator between these two perspectives. 
2.5. 
Organizational learning as knowledge processing Organizational learning has also been studied as a system of social knowledge processing (see Pentland, 1995; Boisot, 1995; Dixon, 1994; Huber, 1991; LeonardBarton, 1995; Nonaka & Takeuchi, 1995). 
One of the most interesting attempts is made by Nonaka and Takeuchi (1995) who propose a theory of cycles of knowledge production. 
Nonaka’s and Takeuchi’s theory is based on a matrix of conversions from tacit to explicit and explicit to tacit knowledge. 
The cycle of knowledge creation begins with socialization, the sharing of tacit knowledge. 
The next phase is the construction of explicit concepts by externalizing the tacit knowledge. 
After that, systemic knowledge is created by combining and ordering conceptual knowledge. 
Finally, the created new knowledge is internalized and converted into operational knowledge. 
In complex processes such as development of new products, this cycle is repeated over and over again. 
The framework proposed by Nonaka and Takeuchi directs our attention to the socially constructed, distributed and embedded nature of knowledge and the processes through which it is created and developed. 
Thus the knowledge process framework helps us to focus on the “organizational learning” proper, that is, on the collective, social processes of learning. 
On the other hand, however, it also alienates us from it. Organizations are not basically knowledge systems, but systems that produce something of value to the society. 
The knowledge-process framework does not explicate and explain the relation of knowledge processes to the productive processes in the organization; why and what kind of knowledge is needed in the productive processes and their management, and how the knowledge is created and used in these processes. 
Nonaka and Takeuchi describe the knowledge creation process in product development after a decision has been made to develop a new product. 
Their theory does not explain how a need for creating new knowledge emerges in the first place, and how a problem is identified. 
Only when the knowledge-creation process is set into the context of an organization’s activities, does the understanding of the knowledge processes help us understand organizational learning. 
Instead of basing the knowledge creation cycle on the transformations of knowledge along the epistemic (tacit-explicit) and ontological (individual-collective) dimension as Nonaka and Takeuchi do, we suggest that the cycle should be based on phases of problem identification, solution generation and application, and the generalization of the solution in practical activity. 
In these phases, the cognitive content is typically represented in different combinations of tacit and explicit, individual and collective elements (Engestro¨m, 1996). 
2.6. 
Evaluation of the conceptual tools used for analyzing and enhancing organizational learning Even though the managers’ cognition, the incremental change of processes, the cooperation and exchange of experience in communities of practice, as well as the sociocognitive processes and the cooperative knowledge creation in the social knowledge processes, are all important aspects of organizational learning, we maintain that the relationships between these explanatory principles remain obscure without a cultural historical approach. 
This kind of approach would also elucidate the relationship between the learning processes that operate in the incremental development of routines and the learning processes that operate in the radical, qualitative transformations of the organization (Bartunek, 1988; Geresick, 1991) as well as the relationship between learning and obstacles to learning. 
To better understand these relationships, we have to focus more on the dynamics of learning. 
For this we need a theoretical concept and a systemic unit of analysis that allows us to analyze the relationships between different elements in human activity. 
In the next section, we shall introduce an alternative concept for the unit of analysis and intervention called “activity system”, based on Cultural Historical Activity Theory (CHAT), and we shall outline the main features of an alternative approach to collective learning, Developmental Work Research (DWR), which focuses on a new type of learning characterized as “expansive learning”. 
After introducing the basic concepts and principles of the theory and the intervention method, we shall describe a case of expansive learning in a state agency. 
With the case example, we aim to illustrate that by using the “activity system” as the unit of analysis and a concrete historical approach, some problems plaguing the main approaches to organizational learning can be avoided or alleviated. 
3. Cultural historical activity theory 3.1. 
Cultural mediation of human activity The cultural historical theory of activity is a crossdisciplinary theory about human activity. 
The initial ideas of CHAT were formulated in 1920s and 1930s by a group of Russian psychologists who felt that traditional psychology was not able to describe the relationships between the individual and the society adequately or to account for the historical development of psychological processes. 
3 They maintained that the practical, productive interaction with the world has a pivotal role in the formation of the psychological processes. 
These interactions are culturally mediated in the sense that humans use concepts and tools that the society has developed during its history. 
The cultural mediators individuals use, carry with them the experiences of other human beings, past and present, and the history of human practice. 
4 They also carry the typical intentions and objectives of people in a specific situation. 
Cultural artifacts emphasize those aspects of the object that are relevant to a social practice. 
The subject does not perceive the given thing or process as such, but as a culturally determined object of activity, as material for producing something, as a specific problem to be solved, etc. 
Man projects cultural meanings onto the object and sees also the potential outcomes that can be produced by transforming the object with 3 The original foundation of Activity Theory was laid by L. S. Vygotsky during the 1920s and early 1930s as a cultural-historical school of psychology. 
His work was continued by A. N. Leont’ev and A. R. Luria, who developed his ideas further and started to use the term “activity”. 
A good historical review of that development can be found in Leont’ev (1989). 
4 An example of this is the “QWERTY” — order of alphabets in our computer keyboards. 
The impractical order was developed to prevent jamming of the mechanical keys of the first typewriters (Poto´snak, 1988). 
the available tools. 
Higher psychological processes are not biologically given, but are formed while individuals internalize what first existed externally as a social practice. 
Language is an integral part of the overall process of cultural mediation, the tool of tools. 
The notion of tool mediation is double-sided; what we conventionally call tools and what we call symbols are two aspects of the same phenomenon. 
Mediation through tools is more outwardly oriented, mediation through signs is more inward oriented, but both aspects adhere to every cultural artifact. 
Human beings constantly synthesize the two worlds, the directly given and the culturally mediated, to provide the mental foundations of their real-time actions in the world. 
New states of the subject arise from the coordination of information from the mediated and the direct connections between the subject and the object. 
The basic structure of human cognition that results from tool mediation is pictured in the triangle of Fig. 1. For example, a medical practitioner perceives the appearance of a patient who comes to see him, and in examining the patient, gets more direct perceptions (the line S–O in Fig. 1 represent this, S being the practitioner and O being the patient). 
On the other hand, the doctor uses the concepts, theories and disease categories of medical science as well as a set of research methods and instruments when studying the patient. 
The coordination of the immediate perceptions and the perceptions created through the mediation of these artifacts — say the measurement of blood pressure (line S–M–O in Fig. 1) — leads to a diagnosis of the patients disease and a corresponding picture of treatment possibilities (St n+1 in Fig. 1). 5 Fig. 1. A model of the basic mediational structure. 
(S) subject, object (O), and medium (M) at the vertices of the triangle indicate the basic constraints of mind. 
The line S–O represents the “natural”, (unmediated) functions, the line S–M–O represents the functions where interactions between subject and object are mediated by auxiliary means. 
St n is the subject’s state of knowledge at time n; Osm is the object as represented via the medium; O n , object at time n;St n+1 , emergent new state of the subject’s knowledge at time n+1 (Cole and Engestro¨m, 1993, pp. 5–7). 
5 CHAT is not the only theory that emphazises the culturally mediated nature of human activity. 
The “Actor Network Theory” analyzes the various processes of mediation in humans’ interaction with each other and with nature (Latour 1993, 1994). 
The main difference between CHAT and ANT is the former’s emphazis on the intentional nature of human activity. 
(For a comparison see Miettinen, 1999.) Human development can be seen as a process of remediation, the substitution of old mediating artifacts with new artifacts which serve better the needs of the activity concerned. 
Remediation means that the external objects are seen in a new context, interpreted in a new way. 
Because the mediating artifacts are both signs and tools, remediation does not only mean conceptual reframing of the object of the activity (see Bartunek, 1988), it also means that the object is acted upon in a new way, that the interaction between the subject and object, as well as both the anticipated and the real outcomes of that interaction change. 
3.2. 
The new unit of analysis: “activity system” According to A. N. Leont’ev (1978), human activity has a hierarchic structure. 
Individuals’ actions are always situated in the context of a historically developed collective praxis, an activity system. 
In Fig. 2, the model of individual action in Fig. 1 has been complemented to depict the collective activity system. 
The model looks at the activity from the point of view of one actor, the subject, but the fact that subjects are constituted in communities is indicated by the point in the model labeled “community”. 
The relations between the subject and the community are mediated, on one hand, by the groups’ full collection of “mediating artifacts” and, on the other hand, by “rules” that specify acceptable interactions between members of the community, and “division of labor”, the continuously negotiated distribution of tasks, powers and responsibilities among the participants of the activity system (Cole & Engestro¨m, 1993, p. 7). Fig. 2. A general model of an activity system. 
Due to the division of labor, the relation between the outcome of the whole activity (the value created) and the individuals’ actions becomes indirect and mediated. 
Leont’ev (1978) explains the relation between individual actions and collective activity with an example about primitive hunters who, in order to catch a game, separate into two groups: the catchers and bush-beaters frightening the game towards them. 
When compared with the motive of hunting — to catch the game to get food and clothing material — the individual actions of the bush-beaters are irrational; they can be understood only as parts of the larger system of the hunting activity. 
When activities become institutionalized, they are rather strong and enduring. 
6 For instance, the practice of a medical doctor is stabilized by the specially planned premises, the expensive instrumentation, the special training system, legal and professional rules of the professional’s conduct, etc. 
The established activity system directs the individuals’ actions. 
On the other hand, the different components of the system change and are constantly renegotiated (Engestro¨m, 1991). 
The key element of an activity system is the object of that activity. 
The object is the societal motive of the activity, it defines the activity and separates activities from each other. 
The object can be a material thing, but it can also be less tangible (like a plan) or totally intangible (like a common idea) as long as it can be shared for manipulation and transformation by the participants of the activity. 
Contrary to individuals’ actions, which have a clear and finite objective, the object of an activity is never finite and exactly determined. 
It can be better characterized as a horizon of possibilities and possible objectives for the actors, something that unfolds in the process of the activity. 
Each individual taking part in a common activity has a slightly different view and interpretation of the object and purpose of the activity depending on the individual’s position in the division of labor, his or her history in the activity, training and experience etc. 
Thus, the activity system is always internally heterogeneous and “multivoiced”. 
There are many competing and partly conflicting views. 
Even though some individuals are more powerful and central in the collective activity no one individual can completely impose his or her view to the other persons taking part in the activity. 
That is why no view should be taken a priori as privileged, “right” or an official view when analyzing the activity. 
Instead, the historical development of the activity and its object as well as the types of interpretation can be described. 
The outcome of an activity will become a part of another activity system: an object to be further transformed in the “value chain”, a subject (the outcome of a training activity), a tool, a rule etc. 
There is always a network of functionally linked activity systems. 
The links between activity systems are determined by the objects and outcomes of the activities in the network. 
In the network around the “central” activity to be analyzed, there are typically such activities as the object or client activities, rule producing managerial or administrative activities and instrument producing activities. 
6 CHAT emphasizes the institutionalization of social interaction very much like the institutional theory of Berger and Luckmann (1966/1987). 
CHAT differs from the social construction approach in its emphasis on the object orientedness of human activity and the central role of artifacts. 
The explanation of social change by inner contradictions of activity systems is also original to CHAT. 
From the point of view of activity theory, “organizational learning” manifests itself in qualitative changes in an activity system. 
It is not an aggregation of individuals’ learning to perform certain actions. 
The collective learning is different in different phases of the qualitative change of an activity system. 
In some cases, the change process can proceed if individuals learn to perform new types of actions. 
In some phases, it presupposes an analysis and realization of the causes of the problems in the system. 
In some cases, it presupposes the creation of innovative new forms of activity and new artifacts, etc. 
When the object of the activity is reinterpreted, and the actors’ interaction with the object is remediated to the effect that the object of the activity expands, we can speak of “expansive learning” (see Engestro¨m, 1987). 
A variety of different forms of learning is typically needed when an organization goes through a cycle of expansive learning. 
3.3. 
Dynamics of change and expansive remediation in the activity systems The dynamic forces of change and learning in the activity are explained in the theory by contradictions within the activity system. 
Contradictions are fundamental tensions and misalignments in the structure that typically manifest themselves as problems, ruptures, and breakdowns in the functioning of the activity system. 
Different levels of contradictions can be identified, depending on their positions in the network of activities. 
The actors try to remove these disturbances by changing and developing the cultural mediators of the activity. 
DWR assumes that the historical development of activity systems proceeds in the cycles of emergence, transformation and solving of inner contradictions within the activity system, as depicted in Fig. 3 (Engestro¨m, 1987, p. 189). 
When the compoFig. 3. The phases of the cycle of expansive transition and learning (the two-ended arrows indicate that the progress through the cycle is not deterministic but can oscillate between phases, be blocked or degenerate back to an earlier state). 
nents of an activity system begin to misalign, due to internal and external development, the activity begins to loose its clear direction. 
The amount of disturbances and problematic situations increases, and there is a rising need for change that is not yet, however, clearly focused. 
There is an increasing, diffuse discontent which is more often directed to individuals than toward the structural features of the activity system. 
If the components of the activity system change substantially and misalign, contradictions between the components will emerge and aggravate. 
For the individuals taking part in the activity this means “impossible tasks”, stress and failure. 
The dissatisfaction begins to focus on specific parts of the activity, but there seems to be no acceptable way out. 
For instance, new technology that has been adopted causes many disturbances and problems, but, it is impossible to return to the old technology. 
The double-bind experience is the psychological counterpart of the contradiction between the parts of the activity system. 
To overcome a double-bind situation, an analysis of the situation and of the contradictions, as well as the search for alternatives, is called for. 
The analysis serves a basis for planning a solution to the contradictions in the present praxis. 
To overcome the contradiction, the object and the purpose of the activity — what is produced and why — has to be reinterpreted and reconstructed in a wider perspective. 
The new view of the object and purpose creates the perspective and motivation for change. 
In this phase, new tools, new division of labor and new forms of cooperation to realize the new way of working are also being planned. 
The change begins often with experiments on the most important parts of the new solution. 
The qualitative change generalizes gradually to the whole activity system if the produced innovations help to overcome the acute contradictions in the activity system. 
Adopting new tools and practices creates contradictions between the old practices and the new ones. 
These contradictions are manifested in new kinds of problems, ruptures and disturbances in the activity. 
The contradiction between the old and the new ways of acting affects also the way these problems are solved. 
There is a constant tension between the expansive, future oriented solutions and the regressive ones that would mean return to the old practices. 
The solutions to the problems gradually give form to a new practice which may eventually be quite different from the planned model of the new activity. 
If the new practices are successful, they will be gradually routinized and new unofficial social practices and forms of cooperation as well as concepts and ways of thinking evolve around them. 
On the other hand, during this phase, the actors meet with difficulties and problems in their cooperation with the neighboring activities. 
The dynamics of change is no longer so much the contradiction between the new and old ways of working within the activity system, as the contradiction between the actual new practice and the old expectations of the representatives of the neighboring activities. 
The phases of a development cycle do not, however, follow each other automatically. 
On the contrary, the phases represent possibilities that can be realized through active development work and conscious learning activity. 
In many cases, the actors build individual and collective defenses in order not to have to encounter the contradictory demands of their situation and thus make problem identification and problem solving difficult. 
The development can also be hampered because the actors cannot develop an agreeable solution to the contradictions or do not recognize the systemic and collective nature of their problems and try to manage the situation by individual solutions. 
4. Expansive transition in a labor-protection inspector’s work 4.1. 
The historically developed activity system In Europe, it is common that there is state legislation and norms concerning the work conditions and safety in work. 
In Finland, the enforcement of labor protection legislation is in the hands of eleven district authorities. 
The Ministry of Health and Social Welfare (formerly the National Board of Labor Protection) supervises the enforcement work. 
It also issues instructions on working conditions, machinery, and equipment, runs labor protection training and promotes publicity on labor protection. 
The main form of activity of the labor protection districts is the inspection of working premises, which is done by labor-protection inspectors. 
The purpose of their work is to ensure that the labor protection regulations are being observed and to advise on improvements of working conditions and safety. 
The inspectors give specified instructions aimed at eliminating defects and hazards. 
If this is insufficient, they can order the employer to remedy the defect within a given period of time and under threat of a fine if necessary. 
In extreme cases, an inspector can order a complete halt to operations or demand that work with a specific site, machine or method be discontinued. 
The inspectors typically have college level technical training and/or background as labor protection managers or labor protection delegates in industry. 
The National Board of Labor Protection set in 1989 a project to develop the work forms of the inspectors. 
The first author of this article (later in the text referred as the consultant) was invited to act as a consultant and specialist in the developmental work research method in this process. 
In the beginning of the project a task force group of inspectors was set to analyze the historical development of labor inspectors’ work in order to recognize the historical roots of the present-day practices and to identify contradictions within the inspectors’ current activity system. 
The inspector group found three historical periods of development of their activity system. 
During the first period from 1889 until the 1970s, the object of the inspection work was heavy industry and especially dangerous work places. 
Each inspector inspected his or her “own” industrial workplaces once a year. 
The second period began after a very intense period of industrialization in the early 1970s. 
The amount and versatility of industrial workplaces had increased and a new law extended the labor protection control from industrial workplaces to all work places. 
The protection activity was reorganized and new specialized personnel was hired. 
The amount of work places to be inspected was so great that, in spite of the increased number of inspectors, all workplaces could not be yearly inspected any longer. 
During the second development period from the early 1970s to the mid 1980s, the work remained individual, but the protection activity got new traits of functional bureaucracy. 
Work places were distributed between the inspectors according to the branch of industry. 
The district organization was divided into specialized sections. 
The National Board of Labor Protection issued detailed instructions for the inspectors and tried to standardize the inspection procedure and develop strategic planning of the activity. 
A broad analysis of labor protection problems in Finland and a program of national labor protection projects to eliminate common causes of accidents and work originated illnesses was planned. 
The Board also issued statements of priority to focus the inspectors’ work on important areas. 
The project work did not, however, develop because of the inspectors’ individual way of working and the division of labor, which meant that each inspector was responsible for “his or her own workplaces”. 
The third development period began gradually in the 1980s. 
During the 1980s, the optimism of the reform work of the previous phase was lost and there was growing awareness and discussion that by making surveys in work premises the inspectors cannot get an overall diagnostic picture of the safety situation and influence the real causes of defects and hazards. 
During the inspections, the inspectors observe single defects, but not the causes of the defects, and even this is not very effective, because many of the defects and hazards can only be noticed under exceptional situations. 
On the other hand, the inspectors complained that the same, often trivial defects appeared repeatedly in spite of the instructions given. 
4.2. 
Hypothesis of the inner contradictions of the inspectors’ activity system On the basis of the historical analysis, the consultant prepared the following model of the inspectors’ activity system and its inner contradictions in the late 1980s. 
According to the model, the individually working inspector (Fig. 4) has a great and heterogeneous amount of workplaces to inspect, and he or she meets at the workplaces complex novel technologies and new types of hazards. 
The inspectors’ tools for analyzing these are the directives, regulations, and instructions issued by the Ministry and the National Board of Labor Safety, each inspector’s own, experience-based picture of the safety hazards typical to the branch as well as the standard procedure of inspection. 
These tools were increasingly inadequate in view of the amount of work places and the changing nature of safety problems (contradiction 1 in Fig. 4). The division of labor, in which the inspectors work as individuals and are responsible for a fixed set of their “own” work places, makes this problem even more acute (contradiction 2 in Fig. 4). The consultant suggested to the inspectors the hypothesis that the inner contradictions depicted in the model were both the root causes of the disturbances, ruptures and problems of their daily work and obstacles of collective learning. 
To test this hypothesis he videotaped ten actual inspections and interviewed all those that took part in the inspection processes. 
The National Board of Labor Safety organized small groups of inspectors to look at the videotaped inspections and analyze the disturbances and ruptures as well as innovations in the processes. 
The inspectors taking part in the analysis had full transcripts of the discussions and protocols of the interviews at their disposal. The inspector groups classified the disturbances and ruptures in the Fig. 4. Labor protection inspectors’ activity system and its inner contradictions before the change in the late 1980s. 
process they found by using the model of their activity system depicted in Fig. 4. Most of the found disturbances and ruptures seemed really to be caused by either the inadequacy of the inspectors’ tools or by their division of labor, i.e. the contradictions found in the historical analysis. 
The analysis helped the inspectors begin to look critically at the activity system they had inherited from previous practice. 
Instead of blaming themselves or each other for the difficulties and trying to justify themselves, they began to focus their attention on possibilities to develop their tools and their division of labor. 
4.3. 
Developing a vision of the future activity system The results of the analysis and the possibilities of developing the inspectors’ activity system were discussed in a seminar. 
A recurrent theme in the seminar was the need to be able to prioritize the alternative objects of inspection and to concentrate the work efforts in the most severe problems. 
The inspectors felt that they needed a new instrument to overcome the contradictions of the activity system (see Fig. 4). That instrument should enable them to identify important general safety problems, analyze their causes and plan an intervention to change the situation. 
The analysis of, and intervention in important general safety problems would be realized by flexibly-set teams of inspectors in accordance with the safety problem areas that the overview showed to be the most urgent. 
Several ideas for a new instrument that would allow the inspectors to be more selective were presented. 
The consultant summed up the discussions in a model of the inspectors’ future activity system. 
The first draft for the model of the future activity system was then developed in many discussions. 
The final form in which all the components of the activity system would be changed to match the change of the object of the activity is presented in Fig. 5. 4.4. 
Changing the activity in the Uusimaa Labor Protection District In 1990 The National Board of Labor Protection set a project to develop that new instrument for the planning of inspection activities of a labor protection district. 
The project was realized in the Uusimaa labor protection district where the new instrument was also first taken into use. 
The new instrument was called the System for Depicting the Field of Activity (SDFA). 
It was based on a three-level depiction which allowed the “zooming” of important areas of interest. First the project made a general statistical description of the labor hazards in different branches of industry and in different trades. 
This was the first level of the system. 
Its purpose was to define a set of important problem areas for a more detailed analysis. 
The second level of description aimed at analyzing the causes of labor hazards. 
The idea of the project group was that the third level would be a plan of intervention to remove the identified labor safety problems. 
One of the major problem areas, according to the first level analysis, was the construction industry. 
The relative amount of deaths at work, severe work accidents, occupational diseases and early retirements due to invalidity was one of the highest. Fig. 5. The future vision of the inspectors’ activity system. 
In 1991, the labor district set an inspector team to locate the types of workplaces, phases of work and trades in construction work where risks were the greatest and to analyze the causes of the risks. 
The team also had to develop the structure for a database for the second level of the system of depicting the field of activity (the SDFA). 
The object of work of the newly set inspector team was, in this case, the totality of different construction work activities within their area. 
The team analyzed and described the given construction workplaces and — activities from various points of view. 
They collected statistics of hazards according to — construction activities classified according to the project type: land construction, housing, prefabricated house production, roofs, plumbing, etc. 
— different trades and occupations in the construction branch — construction firms — construction activity classified according to contract form — the firm’s relation to the contract (main contractor, subcontractor, etc.). 
This gave the team an opportunity to locate the most dangerous areas and to begin to analyze the causes of the hazards. 
After having established the basic structure of the database, the team began to collect data. 
The idea was to collect data of construction firms and trades in the district’s area. 
Therefore, a specialist from the Confederation of Finnish Construction Industries and a labor safety manager and a workers’ labor protection delegate from a large construction firm were invited to take part in the work. 
The work aroused interest in these organizations and a new type of network of cooperation began to develop. 
These contacts also gave the group access to information that was not available in public statistics. 
The team analyzed all the available research results on labor safety in construction, as well, and put the findings into a database. 
To do this, the team had to build contacts to researchers. 
The team collected the information first manually, but it soon became evident that the amount of data was too large to be processed in that way. 
Consequently, one of the members of the team developed an electronic database using the database features of the Excel spreadsheet program. 
All the collected information was accessible to the members of the team and it was easy to update the database. 
When the first collection of information had been done, the team analyzed thoroughly the results with other inspectors working in the construction branch. 
They set new inspection tasks and tasks for further analysis. 
The team prepared a new instrument — a type of extended check-list — for the inspections. 
They derived the items in the check-list from three sources. 
One third of the items were derived from the collected data, one third from the inspectors’ experiences, and one third of the issues to be dealt with were established at the work places during the inspection in a discussion with the representatives of the employer and the employees about the most urgent work health risks. 
The discussion about the most alarming health risks with the representatives of the workplace turned out to be important. 
The inspectors, who realized the experiment reported that these discussions gave them information about matters they did not even know were there to be asked. 
The inspectors’ new approach turned the whole inspection discussion into a dialogue, which it had not been before. 
Furthermore, the new procedure led the inspectors to pay attention to the differences of opinion of the different actors at the workplace. 
The resulting hierarchy of tools and the use of the database as a common memory is illustrated in Fig. 6. Afterwards the deputy director of the Uusimaa Labor Protection District explained in an interview that the joint preparation of a common inspection instrument, the check-list, was very important. 
Each inspector had to interpret what the data collected in the database meant in terms of the inspection work and relate it to his or her own experience and previous thoughts about the causes of hazards. 
The inspectors also began for the first time to compare systematically their experiences. 
Before, the inspectors had occasionally had quite fixed opinions about the typical hazards. 
It turned out that these opinions were not always very accurate and they could even be systematically biased. 
The inspectors’ individual learning from work experience turned out to have been partly superstitious. 
Now the constant analysis of the causes of hazards and the testing of hypotheses led the inspectors to test and sharpen their analyses of the causes of hazards. 
Planning the inspection instrument connected the individual inspections to the larger context of the inspection project and the development of the common database. 
Thus the inspectors had to think about the further use of the information they collected in the inspections. 
After having inspected the selected workplaces and collected data, the inspectors summarized and analyzed the findings. 
These were also discussed with all the inspectors working in the construction branch. 
In the discussions, inspectors made genFig. 6. The use of the new instrument, the second level database of the SDFA. 
eralizations of the findings and decided about further targets of the inspection work. 
For instance, it was found that the occupational risks were often connected with the bad quality of the scaffoldings used. 
The scaffoldings were often rented from equipment renting companies that did not reassure the flawlessness of the parts of scaffolding they delivered. 
Action was then taken to get these firms to improve their quality control systems. 
It was also discovered that the forms of subcontracting contracts were out-dated and did not take into account the new practices. 
This led the inspector team to take initiative to change legislation and the control practices in subcontracting. 
These examples show how the object of the inspectors’ work had changed. 
Instead of working only with individual work places and their safety defects, they now worked with the causes of these defects in a network of cooperating firms. 
The common analysis of the results of the inspections and the use of the new common tool made it possible for the management and the inspectors in the Uusimaa District of Labor Protection to identify and describe the objects of work for the inspector teams. 
After the first pilot team, similar teams of inspectors were set to analyze urgent safety problem areas and to plan and execute interventions on them. 
4.5. 
Generalization of the new form of activity and the second expansive cycle: change of management activity The development of the labor inspectors’ work led the management of Uusimaa labor protection district into a crisis. 
The object of the management’s work had been the supervision of a set of individually working inspectors. 
The new tool and the new teams changed the object of management activity radically. 
The inspector teams doing the new kind of work could not be managed according to the old division of management work and with the old procedures of management. 
The problem areas the teams worked on crossed the boundaries of the sections and the teams’ work was much more explorative and creative than the traditional inspection work. 
This change of the object of the management’s work was, however, only the “last straw” that accentuated the deadlock of the old form of district management, which had developed gradually over many years. 
To solve the problem, the district manager started a management development project. 
In the project, the managers reconstructed the history of the management practices of the district. 
They recognized two former expansive transitions in the management system. 
Up to the 1970s, the management of the district was part of the chief inspector’s work. 
Besides his own inspection work, he supervised other inspectors, who were regarded as his assistants. 
This “craft type” management system got into a crisis in the mid 1970s when the amount of work places to be inspected and the versatility of these increased, and more persons, in particular specialists of the new branches of activity, were recruited. 
A bureaucratic, functional type of management structure was built which functioned well until the late 1980s, when once again the amount and versatility of work premises to be inspected increased because the inspection of small firms was transferred from the local authorities to the state and was given to the district. 
Owing to the new instrument for depicting the field of activity, as well as the great amount of working premises to be inspected, the management had begun to see the object of their work in a new light. 
Instead of the traditional supervision of the inspectors’ work according to a fixed division of labor, the district manager and the heads of sections saw it as their task to identify important labor protection problems in the district’s area and to organize teams of inspectors to analyze the problems and to make interventions to overcome the problems. 
The old fixed division of the management’s work was in sharp contradiction to the new “management by priorities and results” approach. 
This hypothesis of the inner contradiction in the district management activity system was tested by analyzing the disturbances, ruptures and innovative solutions found in the process of preparing the activity plan for the next year as well as in the management meetings. 
7 The analysis showed that, indeed, many of the everyday management problems could be attributed to this inner contradiction in the management activity system. 
The next phase in the expansive transition was the search for a new solution. 
As the managers were unanimous about the basic problem, the contradiction between the object of the management’s activity and its division of labor, it was natural to concentrate on looking for ways to overcome this contradiction. 
This was done using a kind of prototyping method. 
The managers, together with some representatives of the personnel, first considered what other possibilities there might be in defining the object of the management’s work. 
After this exercise, the possible principles that could be used to divide management work were studied. 
Three alternative interpretations of the object of the managers’ work and three different principles of division of management work were combined in a matrix to produce nine different solution alternatives. 
In a seminar, the managers and representatives of personnel discussed thoroughly the pros and cons of all the alternatives (examples of most of the solutions could be found in real life, either in the history of the district, or in some of the other districts or in foreign countries). 
The managers came to the conclusion that the future management system would be based on two basic ideas: team based project inspection, and result-unit organization. 
These two ideas were not entirely compatible. 
Further qualifications were needed for the concept of “result unit”. 
The generalization of the project based inspection system had turned out to be problematic. 
The inspectors had realized that it is very difficult to combine the client service that demanded quick reaction to customer impulses with the more proactive and self regulated project work. 
No inspector, on the other hand, wanted to specialize altogether in client service. 
It was decided that one of the result units would be the client service unit, and that all the inspectors would work there for a period each year. 
The other result units would be “programs” of related projects. 
In the further elaboration of the management structure, each of the four newly appointed unit heads also got responsibility for 7 One of the officials interviewed all those who took part in the planning process and identified disturbances and ruptures in the process. 
The data was presented to the management team. 
The consultant videotaped a meeting of the management team and meetings of the sections and selected samples of the videotaped meetings to be analyzed together with the managers. 
The managers then analyzed the meetings to identify typical disturbances and ruptures in the process of joint planning. 
developing new management tools for one central process; these being the cooperation in client service, the management by results process, the development of strategic analysis and the development of the inspectors’ skills and inspection methods. 
The management system was formally changed in January 1994. 
1994 was a year devoted to changing the practice. 
In September 1994, the district arranged an evaluation seminar for the management and the representatives of all inspector teams. 
In the seminar discussions, it became clear that the new flexible organization resulted in both enthusiasm and anxiety among inspectors and that there were strong conflicts between the old and the new systems and also between the supporters of the old and supporters of the new way of working. 
Many of the inspectors expected the new form to be as permanent as the old had been. 
Only after many discussions was it commonly realized that the organization was changing all the time and part of the work was to discover and develop constantly better new ways of doing things. 
The new organization and circulation of inspectors in the client service had revealed how unevenly the inspectors’ occupational skills had developed while the inspectors had been devoted only to their own work places and problems encountered there. 
After the reorganization, the management analyzed and reengineered all the client service processes, which each inspector had formerly realized in a more or less individual way, and started a training program to even out the levels of knowledge and mastery in the basic competencies. 
Even though the management had believed that they were already moving from supervision to a more strategic form of management, the new object of management work became a collective reality only after the change of management tools and the division of management labor. 
Despite stressing the individual managers’ responsibility, the change actually led the managers to work increasingly as a team. 
This resulted from the fact that they had a new common object of their management activity: the change process they had started. 
The new SDFA tool was the key element also in the expansive cycle of the management’s activity. 
The system depicted not only the problem areas that became the objects of the inspector teams activity but also the overall situation and the relative urgency of different problems, which is the central part of the object of the managers’ work. 
Management used the tool to prioritize the tasks of the district and to define projects and project objectives. 
5. Discussion 5.1. 
Special features of collective learning in the case example In this case, collective learning was closely connected to a particular historical situation. 
It was a local process of solving historically developed contradictions in the inspectors’ activity system in the Uusimaa district. 
The inspectors’ activity system was in a historical phase, where possibilities for individual learning and the improvement of collectively realized practices were blocked by a historically developed inner contradiction in the activity system: the traditional concept of enforcing labor protection legislation as well as inspectors’ tools and division of labor did not match the object of the activity which had become larger and more complex. 
This led to problems, ruptures and disturbances in the inspection work and “impossible tasks” for the inspectors. 
Overcoming these contradictions led to a period of intensive individual and collective learning that was necessary for creating a new form of activity, but it also created new contradictions. 
The learning in the case was both radical and incremental. There was an interaction between the development of the activity system and individual and collective learning. 
The inspectors realized together with the consultant a cycle of expansive learning which created a qualitatively new type of labor protection control activity. 
It is evident that there would not have been motivation for this kind of change, had the inspectors not recognized the inner contradictions of their common activity system as the causes of the disturbances and problems they encountered individually in their daily work. 
This recognition was made possible by giving the inspectors a “mirror” in the form of a video recording of the inspections and by building a model of their prevailing activity system and its inner contradictions (Fig. 4). The new tool and the new way of working did not, as such, spread to other labor protection districts as a best practice because the contradiction between the object of activity and the division of labor was not, for historical and local reasons, as aggravated in them as it was in the tightly populated, industrial Uusimaa area. 
Although not all inspectors immediately start to work according to the new system. 
The change in the inspectors’ work altered radically the object of the managers’ work. 
Initially this led to a crisis in the management’s activity system. 
The challenge for the management was to learn to direct the project based, learning oriented work and the flexible division of labor and to organize the client service in a new way. 
After the management had changed its activity system and began to learn to direct the new activity of the inspectors, it became possible to generalize and consolidate the developed new form of inspection work. 
While the inspectors’ learning continued during the change of the management system, it is clear, that it would have been severely hampered had the management system not been changed. 
Now when the Uusimaa district has consolidated the new activity system, the qualitative difference and contradiction between the activity of the central administration and the Uusimaa district has become the central dynamic force of the district’s management’s change and learning. 
What we see here, is not a unified learning process of an organization but interacting learning processes in a network of dependent activities (see also Bacharach, Bamberger & Sonnenstuhl, 1996). 
The new type of inspection activity is based on a continuous, collective learning process which is realized by analyzing cooperatively the labor safety problems, creating and testing hypotheses about their causes and possibilities of intervening effectively. 
The former learning process involved a radical transformation of the activity, the latter is more incremental. It is important to note, however, that the latter learning process became possible only after the remediation and reinterpretation of the object of activity, and that the radical change was in fact completed by more incremental learning that followed the first changes. 
Incremental and radical learning are phases in the same cycle of expansive learning. 
It is evident, that without a systemic unit of analysis that takes the socially constructed object of activity as its starting point, an attempt to understand the historically developed problems of the activity and to intervene in its development would not have succeeded. 
There was clearly a change in the cognitive tools as suggested by Argyris and Senge and also a deep change in cultural values as suggested by Schein, but learning in the case cannot be understood only in cognitivistic terms. 
The remediation comprised more than a mere change in the inspectors’ “meaning structure”. 
Cultural artifacts and tools for both doing the work and for learning, as well as the inspector’s practical interaction with their clients and specialists outside their organization, played a decisive role. 
Neither is it understandable as a practical change that was caused by a cognitive change — as a mere application of a new idea. 
The cognitive and practical changes took place in the process of developing the new form of interaction between the inspectors and their clients. 
The change of the interaction became possible by developing the new artifacts to mediate this interaction. 
The planned new instrument and project work made it possible for the inspectors to identify broad safety problems in the districts field of responsibility and to analyze their causes. 
The new cognitive tool, the System of Depicting the Field of Activity, would have been meaningless had the division of labor between inspectors not been changed and had the tasks not been assigned to teams of inspectors instead of individuals. 
Parts of the old inspection practice continued after the change, but the inspectors saw now each inspection in a broader context and as an opportunity to test their hypotheses of the causes of hazards in the problem area they worked on. It is also easy to see that although new “communities of practices” were formed as suggested by Brown and Duguid, and new “routines” were constructed as assumed by Levitt and March, neither of these concepts is capable of grasping the situation as a whole. 
Both of the concepts could be used to describe some aspect of what happened after the radical change when the new way of working had emerged and started to stabilize within the first teams, but neither of them has much to say about how the radical change was possible or why it happened in the way it did. 
The learning did not occur as an accumulation of individual changes and insights as would be the case in the learning processes March and Levitt and Brown’s and Duguid describe. 
On the other hand, it followed neither the logic of consequentiality nor intention of typical rationalistic theories, according to which thinking precedes action. 
It was a consequential and intentional process that was realized in the inspectors practical interaction with the object of their activity. 
The objectives and hypotheses were not derived from general value-statements or intentions, but from a theoretical analysis of the causes of the problems and disturbances the inspectors met in their daily work. 
The objectives and intentions developed during the process as new contradictions emerged. 
The logic of appropriateness and legitimacy played an important role as March and Levitt would predict, but what was considered appropriate and legitimate was radically changed by the common analysis of the history of the activity and the creation and testing of the hypotheses concerning the inner contradictions of the prevailing practice and the possibility to overcome the contradictions. 
The radical change or the more incremental learning did not take place as a byproduct of normal activity or as an aggregation of the results of individual learning processes. 
In both learning processes, learning was a conscious, cooperative activity that was realized through the individuals’ planned and coordinated epistemic and learning actions using specific learning tools. 
These actions comprised, for instance, the analysis of the historical development of the activity system, modeling the present activity system and its contradictions, videotaping inspections and analyzing disturbances and ruptures in the inspection process, creating a model for the new activity system, planning and testing new instruments, creating hypotheses about the causes of safety hazards in workplaces etc. 
The reform of the activity and the overcoming of the inner contradictions of the activity system became possible because the inspectors did not only analyze the work from the point of view of their individual tasks and actions, but from the point of view of the whole activity. 
The development of the new computer tool was an essential stage in the inspectors’ cycle of expansive learning and the social construction of the new, expanded object of their activity. 
Had the inspectors not seen the development of the new tool as a part of the system level solution to the inner contradictions in their activity system and as a part of creating the new form of activity, the tool would not have had the same effect on the activity. 
A centrally developed and operated “workplace information system” had been in use in the labor protection administration for several years and it contained information about workplaces and safety defects found during inspections. 
This long-established information system had not had any major effects on the form of the inspection activity. 
The workplace information system was based on the traditional definition of the object of activity and it was planned for a given and fixed activity system. 
It served more the information needs of the central administration than the inspectors’ daily work. 
The new information system SDFA was, on the contrary, designed by the inspectors themselves to identify and describe new, broader objects of work. 
The system implied that the actor using the system, changes according to the object of the work. 
The old information system had no elements which could aid the reflection on the inspectors own interpretations and ways of working. 
The new system, on the other hand, was based on an idea of constant development, sharpening and testing of hypotheses concerning the causes of hazards and a constant revision of the inspection instruments. 
The inspector teams use the new system as an aid to follow up how their knowledge and picture of the causes of hazards develop, what results they get, and to plan how to develop the activity system in view of the result of the problem solving process. 
According to CHAT, an activity system always organizes around an object of activity. 
The learning connected to the object of activity is, thus, a key to the development of the activity. 
In this case, the socially constructed object of the inspectors’ activity expanded in two ways. 
First, they began to see the inspections in a broader context than before as a means of analyzing and solving recognized general safety problems. 
Second, they began to see their own instruments and their whole activity system more clearly in relation to the safety problems they were working with and also as a part of the object of their work. 
Thus, they learned to reflect on the adequacy of their knowledge and the ways of working in relation to the occupational safety and health problems they were dealing with. 
Learning in the case was not a smooth and harmonious process, but characterized by tensions, conflicts and contradictions which are fundamental in understanding the dynamics of the situation. 
As can be seen from the succession of the learning processes, the most acute and important challenge for learning shifted place during the process within the activity system and within the network of related activity systems. 
6. Conclusions 1. Organizational learning is local and situational, and thus it has to be analyzed in a historical framework. 
What is needed is not general laws of organizational learning to be applied in a concrete situation but conceptual tools to help in the historical analysis of the development problems of local activities. 
General, abstract models — like those described above — can be used as tools for reconstructing a concrete situation on an activity and in identifying and describing historically evolved problems and development possibilities. 
2. Organizational learning is a complex interplay between individual and collective learning; actors, intentional actions and given structures and processes; radical and incremental changes; cognitive development and development of new tools and structures. 
To analyze and influence collective learning, we have to use a unit where all these aspects can be studied together. 
3. The unit of analysis we need has to be systemic, that is, it has to help us to analyze the interrelations of different aspects of an activity. 
In this respect, there is a clear difference between a theoretically systemic such as an “activity system” and descriptive ones such as “routine”, “community of practice” or “knowledge production”. 
We believe that the study of organizational learning can gain much by applying the principles of cultural mediation, object-orientedness and, the hierarchical character of human activity — that is the idea that the collective activity cannot be reduced into individual actions or understood as an aggregation of them — and historical analysis. 
These principles form the central content of the concept of activity system. 
They give an integrating framework that has enough structure to raise essential questions and guide the analysis to construct a systemic picture of the local activity and its historical development. 
On the other hand, the framework is general and does not prescribe any solutions. 
It is valuable as a tool for analysis and planning only when people involved start to analyze their work practices by using it, relate the abstract model to concrete facts about their everyday activity, give meanings to the elements and their relations, and change their work themselves. 
Acknowledgements We would like to thank the Finnish Ministry of Health and Social Affairs, Uusimaa Labor Protection District, and especially District Manager Jaakko Ita¨kannas, Deputy District Manager Markku Marjama¨ki and Inspector Keijo Pa¨iva¨rinta for their cooperation. 
The comments given by the three anonymous referees have greatly helped us in focusing and clarifying the paper. 
References Argyris, C. (1982). 
Reasoning, learning and action: individual and organizational. San Francisco: Jossey Bass. 
Argyris, C. (1985). 
Making knowledge more relevant to practice: Maps for action. 
In E. E. Lawler et al., Doing research that is useful for theory and practice (pp. 
79–106). 
San Francisco: Jossey Bass. 
Arrow, K. (1962). 
The implications of learning by doing. 
Review of Economic Studies, 29, 166–170. 
Bacharach, S. B., Bamberger, P., & Sonnenstuhl, W. J. (1996). 
The organizational transformation process: The micropolitics of dissonance reduction and alignment of logics of action. 
Administrative Science Quarterly, 41, 477–506. 
Bartunek, J. M. (1988). 
The dynamics of personal and organizational reframing. 
In R. R. Quinn, & K. S. Cameron, Paradox and transformation. 
Toward a theory of change in organization and management. 
Cambridge, MA: Ballinger. 
Beer, M., Eisenstat, R. A., & Spector, B. (1990). 
The critical path to corporate renewal. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press. 
Berger, P., & Luckmann, T. (1966/1987). 
The social construction of reality. 
A treatise in sociology of knowledge. 
Harmondsworth: Penguin. 
Blackler, F. (1993). 
Knowledge and the theory of organizations: organizations as activity systems and the reframing of management. 
Journal of Management Studies, (30), 863–884. 
Boisot, M. H. (1995). 
Information space: a framework for learning in organizations, institutions and culture. 
London: Routledge. 
Brown, J. S., & Duguid, P. (1991). 
Organizational learning and communities of practice: toward an unified view of working, learning and innovation. 
Organization Science, 2 (1), 40–57. 
Chandler, A. D. Jr (1961). 
Strategy and structure: chapters in the history of the American industrial enterprise. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Cole, M., & Engestro¨m, Y. (1993). 
A cultural-historical approach to distributed cognition. 
In G. Salomon, Distributed cognitions. 
Psychological and educational considerations (pp. 
1–47). 
Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press. 
Dixon, N. (1994). 
Organizational learning cycle. 
How we can learn collectively. 
London: McGraw-Hill. 
Dodgson, M. (1993). 
Organizational learning: a review of some literatures. 
Organization Studies, 14 (3), 375–394. 
Edmondson, A. C. (1996). 
Three faces of Eden: the persistence of competing theories and multiple diagnoses in organizational intervention research. 
Human Relations, 49 (5), 571–595. 
Engestro¨m, Y. (1987). 
Learning by expanding. 
Helsinki: Orienta-konsultit. 
Engestro¨m, Y. (1991). 
Activity theory and individual and social transformation. 
Multidisciplinary Newsletter for Activity Theory, (7/8), 6–17. 
Engestro¨m, Y. (1996). 
Innovative learning in work teams: analyzing cycles of knowledge creation in practice. 
Paper presented in the international conference “Work and Learning in Transition: Towards an Research Agenda”, sponsored by Russel Sage Foundation, San Diego, CA. Epple, D., Argote, L., & Devadas, R. (1991). 
Organizational learning curves: a method for investigating intraplant transfer of knowledge aquired through learning by doing. 
Organization Science, 2, 58–70. 
Forrester, J. W. (1961). 
Industrial dynamics. 
Cambridge: Productivity Press. 
Forrester, J. W. (1971). 
Counterintuitive behavior in social systems. 
Technology Review, 73, January. 
Geresick, C. J. G. (1991). 
Revolutionary change theories: a multilevel exploration of the punctuated equilibrium paradigm. 
Academy of Management Review, 16 (1), 10–36. 
Hendry, C. (1996). 
Understanding and creating whole organizational change through learning theory. 
Human Relations, 49 (5), 621–641. 
Hirschhorn, L. (1986). 
Beyond mechanization. 
Work and technology in a postindustrial age. 
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. 
Huber, G. P. (1991). 
Organizational learning: the contributing processes and the literatures. 
Organization Science, 2 (1), 88–115. 
Hughes, T. P. (1979). 
The electrification of America: the system builders. 
Technology and Culture, 20 (1), 124–161. 
Jones, M. (1995). 
Organizational learning: collective mind or cognitivist metaphor? 
Accounting Management and Information Technology, 5 (1), 61–77. 
Kaplan, R. E. (1979). 
The conspicious absence of evidence that process consultation enhances task performance. 
Journal of Applied Behavioral Science, 15, 346–360. 
Latour, B. (1993). 
We have never been modern. 
Herfordshire: Harvester Wheatsheaf. 
Latour, B. (1994). 
On technical mediation. 
Philosophy, sociology, genealogy. 
Common Knowledge, 3, 29–64. 
Leonard-Barton, D. (1995). 
Wellsprings of knowledge: building and sustaining the sources of innovation. 
Cambridge: Harvard Business School Press. 
Leont’ev, A. N. (1978). 
Activity, consciousness and personality. 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice–Hall. 
Leont’ev, A. N. (1989). 
The problem of activity in the history of Soviet psychology. 
Soviet Psychology, 27 (1), 22–39. 
Levitt, B., & March, J. G. (1988). 
Organizational learning. 
Annual Review of Sociology, (14), 319–340. 
Løwendahl, B., & Haanes, K. (1997). 
The unit of activity: a new way to understand competence building and leveraging. 
In R. Sanchez, & A. Heene, Strategic learning and knowledge management (pp. 
119– 139). 
Chichester: Wiley. 
Nonaka, I. (1988). 
Toward middle-up-down management: accelerating information creation. 
Sloan Management Review, 1988 (Spring), 9–18. 
Nonaka, I. (1991). 
Managing the firm as an information creation process. 
Advances in Information Prosessing in Organizations, 4, 239–275. 
Nonaka, I., & Takeuchi, H. (1995). 
The knowledge-creating company. 
New York: Oxford University Press. 
Miettinen, R. (1999). 
The riddle of things: activity theory and actor network theory as approaches of studying innovations. 
Mind, Culture and Activity, 6 (3), 170–195. 
Orr, J. E. (1990). 
Sharing knowledge, celebrating identity: community memory in a service culture. 
In D. Middleton, & D. Edwards, Collective remembering (pp. 
169–189). 
London: Sage. 
Poto´snak, K. (1988). 
Keys and keyboards. 
In M. Helander, Handbook of human-computer interaction (chap. 
21) (pp. 
475–494). 
New York: North Holland. 
Pentland, B. T. (1995). 
Accounting, Management and Information Technology, 5 (1), 1–21. 
Reich, R. B. (1991). 
The work of nations. 
New York: Vintage Books. 
Robey, D., Wishart, N. A., & Rodriguez-Diaz, A. G. (1995). 
Merging the metaphors for organizational improvement. 
Accounting Management and Information Technology, 5 (1), 23–39. 
Schein, E. H. (1990). 
Innovative cultures and adaptive organizations. 
Sri Lanka Journal of Development Administration, 7, 9–39. 
Schein, E. H. (1992). 
How can organizations learn faster: the problem of entering the green room. 
Invited adress to the World Economic Forum, 6 February 1992. 
Schein, E. H. (1996). 
Three cultures of management: the key to organizational learning. 
Sloan Management Review, Fall, 9–20. 
Schmidt, K. (1994). 
The organization of cooperative work — beyond the “Leviathan” conception of the organization of cooperative work. 
In T. Malone, CSCW ’94. 
Proceedings of the Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work, Chapel Hill, NC (pp. 
101–112). 
New York: ACM Press. 
Senge, P. M. (1990). 
The fifth discipline. 
The art and practice of the learning organization. 
New York: Doubleday. 
Stewart, T. A. (1993). 
Reengineering: the hot new management tool. 
Fortune, 23 (August), 41–48. 
Tsang, E. W. K. (1997). 
Organizational learning and learning organization: a dichotomy between descriptive and prescriptive research. 
Human Relations, 50 (1), 73–90. 
Tyre, M. J., & von Hippel, E. (1993). 
Locating adaptive learning: the situated nature of adaptive learning in organizations. 
MIT Sloan School of Management, WP#BP 3568-93. 
Virkkunen, J., Kuutti, K., & Young, K. (1997). 
“Activity” instead of “process”? 
Questioning the unit of analysis in BPR. 
In Proceedings of the World Multiconference on Systemics, Cybernetics and Informatics, vol. 
2 (pp. 
136–143). 
Orlando, FL: IIIS. 
Vygotsky, L. S. (1962). 
Thought and language. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Yelle, L. E. (1979). 
The learning curve: historical review and comprehensive survey. 
Decision Sciences, 10, 302–382. 
Zuboff, S. (1988). 
In the age of the smart machine. 
The future of work and power. 
New York: Basic Books. 