a & Suresh Cuganesan b a Discipline of Accounting, School of Business, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia b Dean's Unit, School of Business, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia Published online: 28 Aug 2013. 
To cite this article: Jim Rooney & Suresh Cuganesan (2013) The control dynamics of outsourcing involving an early-stage firm, Accounting and Business Research, 43:5, 506-529, DOI: 10.1080/00014788.2013.818916 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00014788.2013.818916 PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the “Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. 
However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. 
Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. 
The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information. 
Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content. 
This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. 
Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. 
Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/termsand-conditions The control dynamics of outsourcing involving an early-stage ﬁrm JIM ROONEY a∗ and SURESH CUGANESAN b a Discipline of Accounting, School of Business, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia; b Dean’s Unit, School of Business, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia Firms in the early stage of their organisational lifecycle experience challenges that shape the adoption of management controls. 
They are also recognised for their use of outsourcing. 
However, the accounting research has provided limited insight on how these control challenges and inter-organisational control concerns interact to inﬂuence the adoption of speciﬁc controls within an outsourcing relationship involving an early-stage ﬁrm. 
Exploration of this gap provides a key motivation for this paper. 
Contrary to existing management control and organisational science literature, we ﬁnd a strong preference for new or enhanced action controls. 
Conversely, we ﬁnd low levels of interest in result controls by managers within the buyer but not the supplier ﬁrm. 
These preferences inﬂuence interorganisational control adoption within the frame of an incomplete outsourcing contract that emphasises ﬂexibility in terms of relationship exit. 
Within the limits of a case study methodology, we argue that adoption of inter-organisational controls is shaped by tensions between the control challenges of early-stage ﬁrms, the control preferences of managers within these ﬁrms and inter-organisational control concerns. 
These ﬁndings have theoretical implications, expanding the Davila et al. [2009. 
Reasons for management control systems adoption: insights from product development systems choice by early-stage entrepreneurial companies. 
Accounting, Organizations and Society, 34 (3 –4), 322–347] framework and the Merchant [1985. 
Control in Business Organizations. 
Boston, MA: Pitman] control typology into an ESF inter-organisational control context. 
Keywords: management control; early-stage ﬁrms; organisational life cycle; outsourcing; inter-organisational relationships Outsourcing when you are a high growth company is a good idea. 
You don’t have to ﬂex your internal operation as quickly but you have to make sure that your provider can ﬂex. 
So, you want to have a provider that is signiﬁcantly bigger than you. 
If you are growing at 200% or more year on year, if it’s a small piece of a large company, they may need to grow at 10% to cover the growth. 
It’s much easier to grow at 10% for a large company than 200% as a small one. 
You effectively de-risk that high growth. 
(Chief Operating Ofﬁcer. 
outsourcing case study Buyer ﬁrm) # 2013 Taylor & Francis ∗ Corresponding author. 
Email: jim.rooney@sydney.edu.au Accounting and Business Research, 2013 Vol. 
43, No. 5, 506– 529, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00014788.2013.818916 Downloaded by [Open University Library - ISRAEL] at 11:28 28 October 2013 1. Introduction Management control systems (MCS) research has conventionally focused on mature companies with established control systems (Cardinal et al. 2004, Auzair and Langﬁeld-Smith 2005). 
Attention has only recently turned to control adoption by newly established ﬁrms experiencing signiﬁcant growth, sometimes referred to as ‘early-stage’ ﬁrms (ESFs) or new high-growth ﬁrms (Davila 2005, Sandino 2007, Davila et al. 2009 ). This recent focus highlights that ESFs operate in a business context with particular challenges for management control adoption. 
These encompass signiﬁcant environmental uncertainty, ﬂuid managerial concerns and the need to be selective about new formal control adoption, given the time and costs vis-a`-vis the limited resources of the ESF (Granlund and Taipaleenmaki 2005, Sandino 2007). 
One notable effect of environmental uncertainty is a management preference for ﬂexibility in organisational routines and practice (see Feldman and Pentland 2003). 
Recognised as a research gap, organisational ﬂexibility is of increasing interest in MCS research (Frow et al. 2010). 
In addition, given that available cashﬂow and capacity to invest is limited, ESFs commonly enter into inter-organisational relationships through, for example, outsourcing arrangements (Granlund and Taipaleenmaki 2005). 
As summarised in Davila et al. (2009, p. 296): ... startups are resource-constrained and rely to a much larger extent than large companies on partnerships and networks; however, little research has addressed the question of the design of control mechanisms for these relationships. 
In turn, inter-organisational relationships create pressures for contracting and formal control adoption within an inter-organisational relationship to manage coordination, appropriation and dependence concerns (Dekker 2004, Caglio and Ditillo 2008). 
However, these formal controls may reduce organisational ﬂexibility within the inter-organisational arrangement. 
Further, informal (e.g. personnel/cultural) controls are more complex where actors are located outside ﬁrm boundaries (see Anderson et al. 2011). 
Despite these distinctive ESF attributes, the limited accounting research to date on management control in this context has focused on intra-organisational control (Sandino 2007). 
Consistent with practice-oriented research (see Jarzabkowski et al. 2012), there is a need to investigate ‘how ... growing ﬁrms identify their need to adopt MCS’ (Davila 2005, p. 244), particularly within an inter-organisational relationship. 
For example, the requirement for adaptability and ﬂexibility may impact inter-organisational arrangements (Busquets et al. 2009). 
In particular, there is a need for accounting research that considers how control adoption addresses contexts where roles assigned to individual controls conﬂict with one another (see Henri 2006). 
In response, our research question examines how the ESF context inﬂuences the adoption of controls within an outsourcing relationship involving an ESF buyer. 
We seek to contribute to the inter-organisational control literature by exploring the tensions between ES F control challenges associated with ﬂexibility and inter-organisational control concerns. 
Exploration of these tensions has potential to contribute to understanding of the role of actors, controls and environment within an inter-organisation relationship involving an ESF buyer of outsourcing services. 
This research focus is consistent with calls for further study of ﬂexibility – control dynamics in both the organisation (Kamoche and Cunha 2001) and accounting (van der Meer-Kooistra and Scapens 2008) literatures. 
We adopt the Davila et al. (2009) framework addressing reasons for an ESF to adopt new management controls and the Merchant (1985) control typology within a case study method, examining a single outsourcing arrangement in the residential home loan segment of the Australian ﬁnancial services sector. 
The paper is structured into ﬁve remaining parts. 
The next section reviews the relevant management control literature. 
This is followed by a description of the Accounting and Business Research 507 Downloaded by [Open University Library - ISRAEL] at 11:28 28 October 2013 research site and methods. 
Empirical case study observations are presented next. 
Finally, the paper ends with a discussion of ﬁndings and conclusions. 
2. ESFs, outsourcing and inter-organisational control Lack of established business operations and a rapidly changing level of business activity may make it difﬁcult for ESFs to undertake detailed MCS design. 
In this context, the challenge for ESF management is to balance adaptabilit y to the business environment with ﬂexibility in MCS design. 
Collier (2005, p. 325) suggests ‘a “thin” accounting role may be sufﬁcient to ensure management control over the start-up ﬁrm operations’. 
This may apply especially where formal controls are costly and time consuming to install and operate (Sandino 2007). 
Indeed, it is only after an ESF undergoes signiﬁcant growth that it turns to formal control (Silvola 2008). 
However, when examined by Davila et al. (2009), the challenge of linking ESF business adaptability with control ﬂexibility leads to identiﬁcation of a number of reasons for control adoption. 
These reasons comprise: external inﬂuences either to (1) legitimise the ﬁrm or to (2) contract with external parties and internal reasons (3) due to the appointment of key managers who implement controls based on their prior experiences or (4) to support an explicit focus on goals in response to emerging need such as coordination or (5) to control chaos created by unexpected events or (6) to facilitate organisational learning. 
So, while a ‘thin’ role for accounting is seen in practice, the limited research on control adoption by ESFs reﬂects a diverse range of inﬂuences on these small numbers of controls adopted within ESFs. 
At the same time, ESFs are acknowledged adopters of outsourcing and other forms of interorganisational relationships (see Granlund and Taipaleenmaki 2005, Metters 2008). 
Industrylevel factors, such as competitive uncertainty, and ﬁrm-level factors, including limited ﬁnancial resources, provide impetus to engage in outsourcing despite the inherent uncertainties of entering into partnerships (see Kim and Higgins 2007). 
Further, outsourcing relationships are a common form of supply network with value creation based on substantive knowledge ﬂows (Li et al. 2010). 
These beneﬁts make outsourcing arrangements a popular option for ESFs – as well as more mature ﬁrms – entering markets and growing rapidly. 
Whilst offering important insights, three key dimensions are lacking in prior research. 
First and foremost, prior ESF control research neglects the inter-organisational dimension. 
This dimension is important to ESF success, especially in terms of interaction with the business environment in which it operates. 
Inter-organisational networks and relationships are an important source of resources and knowledge acquisition for ESFs (see Dyer and Hatch 2006). 
For example, in the development of organisational capabilities in the early growth stages of a ﬁrm, ‘learning-by doing’ has been identiﬁed as a mediating factor (see Helfat and Peteraf 2003). 
The limited empirical research on ESF control adoption concludes that learning is a signiﬁcant inﬂuence with controls often implemented to ‘code existing practices’ (Davila et al. 2009, p. 338). 
Whilst opportunities for management intervention and the development of capabilities created by the adoption of controls apply to many ﬁrms (see Mouritsen et al. 2001), this role is arguably more critical for ESFs (see Easterby-Smith et al. 2008), particularly with regard to the use of outsourcing relationships. 
In contrast, there is an extensive literature on control adoption within inter-organisational relationships involving mature buyer ﬁrms (Cardinal et al. 2004, Auzair and Langﬁeld-Smith 2005). 
These studies identify that controls are adopted in order to attend to concerns with coordination, appropriation and dependency (Caglio and Ditillo 2008). 
Coordination concerns refer to a lack of clearly deﬁned inter-organisational boundaries, appropriation concerns involve ‘the risk of opportunism by transaction partners’ and dependency concerns ‘relates to their economic 508 J. Rooney and S. Cuganesan Downloaded by [Open University Library - ISRAEL] at 11:28 28 October 2013 relationship’ (Dekker 2008, p. 916). 
These inter-organisational concerns require the adoption of controls, including cultural/personal controls such as trust (see Langﬁeld-Smith and Smith 2003). 
Despite this ﬁnding, the inﬂuence of ESFs on control adoption within an inter-organisational arrangement that includes an ESF buyer ﬁrm is yet to be examined. 
A summary of deﬁnitions associated with the ESF control challenges of adaptability and ﬂexibility is provided in Table 1, along with a summary of deﬁnitions associated with the inter-organisational control concerns identiﬁed by Caglio and Ditillo (2008). 
Second, whilst prior studies identify the role of senior management appointments in inﬂuencing formal control adoption (see Davila 2005, Davila et al. 2009), they do not explain the process by which particular control types are identiﬁed by ESF managers as being imperative to an interorganisational relationship. 
As new ESF management functions emerge, competencies are introduced, experts are hired and management hierarchy expands during growth (Greiner 1972). 
The inﬂuence of functional specialists within ﬁrms affects inter-organisational control (see Seal 2004, Cuganesan 2006). 
Given the strong inﬂuence of individual ESF managers on MCS practice (Davila et al. 2009), the control behaviours of these individuals are likely to have signiﬁcant consequences for inter-organisational control. 
As a result of these gaps, this paper examines how the nature of an ESF outsource buyer ﬁrm inﬂuences the adoption of controls used in inter-organisational relationships. 
The focus is on the mix of inter-organisational controls adopted over time in response to both ESF control challenges and inter-organisational control concerns. 
This includes investigation of the ﬂuctuating inﬂuence of managers and experts from within the ESF buyer ﬁrm. 
In addition to the Davila et al. (2009) framework, we embrace the control typology of Merchant (1985) and Merchant and van der Stede (2003) drawing on and adapting the earlier work of Ouchi (1979). 
As expressed by Anderson et al. (2011, p. 3) in a comparison of ‘popular’ management control frameworks, this typology will particularly help to ‘identify the importance of personnel controls enacted through partner selection processes; a result that was not apparent using Table 1. Deﬁnitions of control preferences and concerns. 
ESF control preferences Control concerns (Caglio and Ditillo 2008, p. 891) Flexibility –‘... a ﬁrm’s capability to meet changes in market demands through integrated and coordinated operational policies’ (Pagell and Krause 2004 as cited in Patel 2011, p. 144). 
‘... means that users can make controlling decisions after enabling systems have provided information’ (Adler and Borys 1996 as cited in Wouters and Wilderom 2008, p. 492). 
Coordination – where ‘interdependencies require some form of coordination, and the joint actions should be aligned across organisational boundaries so as to guarantee a match between partners’ interfaces’ Appropriation – comprising the ‘need to ensure that the value of the joint output is perceived by the parties to be clearly and fairly distributed and that the resources exchanged are not misappropriated by their counterparts’ Adaptability –‘... enable exchange participants to take advantage of opportunities in the exchange environment when they arise and to avoid costly threat to the continual delivery of mutual beneﬁts; thus enhancing overall performance (Heide and Miner 1992)’ (as cited in Mahama 2006, p. 324). 
Cooperation – broadly deﬁned in terms of the existence of threats of opportunism and moral hazard whereby ‘... partners may have incentives to cheat and free-ride in order to attain their own speciﬁc goals at the expense of the objectives of the collective undertaking, so they need to introduce mechanisms to align their objectives’ Accounting and Business Research 509 Downloaded by [Open University Library - ISRAEL] at 11:28 28 October 2013 the other frameworks’. 
This is important given the ESF need for ﬂexibility, leading to the adoption of informal controls consistent with the ‘thin’ role for accounting highlighted earlier. 
Given the organisational theory antecedents of the Davila et al. (2009) framework and the Merchant (1985) control typology, this approach is consistent with the adoption of theoretical pluralism in an accounting context (see Jacobs 2012). 
Whilst initially developed as an intra-organisational typology and applied to the study of control within ESFs (see Davila 2005), this control typology ‘... can easily be extended to partners and other actors in networks, value-chains, etc’ (Malmi and Brown 2008, p. 298). 
This typology sees controls as comprising formal and informal mechanisms. 
Formal mechanisms include: action controls, which stipulate the actions that employees should follow and procedures they should comply with, and result controls, which inﬂuence employees by measuring the outputs or outcomes of their actions. 
Informal mechanisms are grouped as personnel/cultural controls, which seek to align the values and goals of individuals with those of the ﬁrm. 
Based on these previously distinct ESF and inter-organisational control frameworks, we anticipate that an inter-organisational relationship involving an ESF buyer is likely to adopt personnel/ cultural controls and result controls. 
These are aimed at addressing the ESF control challenges of business adaptability and control ﬂexibility expressed in terms of the Davila et al. (2009) framework as proactive internal reasons to adopt new control mechanisms. 
At the same time, consistent with prior inter-organisational control research, action controls may also be adopted in response to inter-organisational appropriation and coordination concerns expressed in terms of the Davila et al. (2009) framework as reactive reasons to adopt new control mechanisms. 
This tension between ESF control challenges (expressed in terms of reasons to adopt new controls as described in Davila et al. 2009) and inter-organisational control concerns (Caglio and Ditillo 2008) expressed in terms of new control mechanisms (Merchant 1985) is summarised in Table 2. For example, ESF managers may inﬂuence the adoption of action, results or cultural/personnel to address coordination concerns within the inter-organisational relationship depending on their prior experience and preferences – an empirical question given prior contingency research ﬁndings. 
The next section outlines the research methods and site used to explore these control tensions. 
3. Case study details and research approach 3.1 Case study details The case study reported in this paper comprises a single outsourcing arrangement involving an ESF buyer within the Australian residential real estate lending industry. 
This industry is a signiﬁcant component of the banking sector, which plays a vital role in the Australian economy (Euromonitor 2003). 
The industry is also signiﬁcant as it has a comparatively rich history of utilising outsourced arrangements. 
Whilst a maturing industry in Australia, the successive deregulation of the industry in the mid-1980s and the adoption of securitisation practices in response to increased competition, saw the entry of a number of Non-Bank Financial Institutions in the 1990s (see Rajapakse 2006). 
With the exception of Collier (2005), the use of a single case study to facilitate rich empirical investigation of control adoption by ESFs is rare. 
However, it is justiﬁed on the basis of the theoretical and empirical research gap encapsulated in the research question identiﬁed the propositions outlined earlier. 
This justiﬁcation has been argued as being considered appropriate for exploratory research and theory building (see Eisenhardt 1989, Yin 1994). 
The limitation of this approach is that we are partly dependent on the accuracy and completeness of participants’ recollections of historical events, although we seek to validate this through the use of multiple data sources (refer to Section 3.2). 510 J. Rooney and S. Cuganesan Downloaded by [Open University Library - ISRAEL] at 11:28 28 October 2013 Table 2. Analytical framework adapted from Caglio and Ditillo (2008), Davila et al. (2009) and Merchant (1985). 
Control mechanisms Contract controls Action controls Results controls Cultural/personnel controls Interorganisational control concern/reason to adopt formal controls Coordination – Legitimise Use of terms and conditions in an outsourcing contract to symbolise Legitimacy (MCS competency) based on the controls planned or adopted Adopted to specify non-contractual actions or processes within the relationship to symbolise Legitimacy (MCS competency) Specify measureable, non-contractual outcomes to be achieved as a symbol of Legitimacy (MCS competency) Engage or plan to engage in social practices aimed at goal congruence and recognisable by external stakeholders as symbolising Legitimacy (MCS competency) – Contracting Imposition of contractual terms and conditions to enhance monitoring of contract coordination within the interorganisational relationship – Proactive (manager background and need to focus) Use of contractual terms and conditions to promote accountability and focus on explicit goals consistent with the experience of Buyer management Use of speciﬁc noncontractual actions or processes to promote accountability and focus on explicit goals consistent with the experience of Buyer management Use of measureable, non-contractual outcomes to promote accountability and focus on explicit goals consistent with the experience of Buyer management Use of social practices aimed at goal congruence to promote accountability and focus on explicit goals consistent with the experience of Buyer management – Reactive (chaos and learning) Use of contractual terms and conditions to manage emerging coordination control problems and code past learning over the duration of the relationship Use of speciﬁc noncontractual actions or processes to manage emerging coordination control problems and code past learning over the duration of the relationship Use of measureable, non-contractual outcomes to manage emerging coordination control problems and code past learning over the duration of the relationship Use of social practices aimed at goal congruence to manage emerging coordination control problems and code past learning over the duration of the relationship (Continued) Accounting and Business Research 511 Downloaded by [Open University Library - ISRAEL] at 11:28 28 October 2013 As described below, the case involves an ESF (hereafter, Alpha) entering into an outsourcing arrangement in 2001 with a mature phase supplier (Omega). 
Omega is part of a publicly listed multinational ﬁrm with global presence. 
Alpha is a specialised home loan lender based in Australia and operating on a national basis. 
Set up in 2000, Alpha is a high growth ESF, initially with fewer than 20 employees with a range of skills and experience within the residential real estate lending industry. 
These skills included all major functions usually present in a ﬁrm operating at a head ofﬁce level within this industry, including treasury, risk, accounting, human resources (HR), legal, market/ product and sales, with the exception of operations and information technology (IT). 
Staff experience levels ranged from 5 to more than 20 years. 
At the end of the research period, Alpha was of medium size with a home loan portfolio value in the range of AUD5 –AUD50 billion (a range provided to protect the anonymity of Alpha), with more than 250 staff. 
The outsourcing arrangement between Alpha and Omega commenced in 2001 and was ultimately terminated in 2006. 
Within the ﬁve-year period of study, the ESF transitioned through to high growth on the basis of new product development in a mature industry. 
After selecting Omega as the outsourcing partner for operations and supporting IT functions, expertise was acquired in order to manage and develop functions and systems not outsourced (treasury, trust management, accounting, risk and HR). 
The outsourcing arrangement comprised business processes and IT associated with key home lending operations. 
These included: mortgage sales lead generation, including capture of home loan application details; home loan application acceptance, credit decisions and the advancing of funds to the borrower; and, once the funds are advanced, maintenance and support of an existing home loan (ranging from inquiries on loan balance and changing loan details such as the postal address for documentation through to requests for loan increases and closure). 
Table 2. Continued. 
Control mechanisms Contract controls Action controls Results controls Cultural/personnel controls Appropriation – same division into Davila et al. (2009) framework as for the coordination concerns Imposition of contractual terms and conditions to enhance monitoring of beneﬁt appropriation concerns within the interorganisational relationship Imposition of speciﬁc noncontractual actions or processes to enhance monitoring of beneﬁt appropriation concerns within the interorganisational relationship Imposition of measureable, non-contractual outcomes to enhance monitoring of beneﬁt appropriation concerns within the interorganisational relationship Imposition of social practices aimed at goal congruence to enhance monitoring of beneﬁt appropriation concerns within the interorganisational relationship Cooperation – same division into Davila et al. (2009) framework as for the coordination concerns Use of contractual terms and conditions to manage emerging control problems and code past learning over the duration of the relationship Use of speciﬁc noncontractual actions or processes to manage emerging control problems and code past learning over the duration of the relationship Use of measureable, non-contractual outcomes to manage emerging control problems and code past learning over the duration of the relationship Use of social practices aimed at goal congruence to manage emerging control problems and code past learning over the duration of the relationship 512 J. Rooney and S. Cuganesan Downloaded by [Open University Library - ISRAEL] at 11:28 28 October 2013 3.2 Research approach Consistent with the need to encompass a range of data sources (see Modell 2010), two data collection methods were utilised. 
First, archival documents were coded and analysed based on the approach described by Krippendorff (1980). 
These documents included outsourcing contracts, governance meeting minutes and related performance reports associated with the Alpha – Omega relationship, such as service reporting, service complaints tracking and one-off service issue escalation documentation. 
Second, semi-structured interviews were conducted with personnel at both Alpha and Omega after the relationship had terminated. 
Further detail on both of these data collection methods is provided below. 
Document coding is an instrument to measure comparative positions and trends in the composition of documents and has been used extensively to assess reporting patterns and disclosures (see Guthrie et al. 2004). 
It focuses on the semantic contact of key documents, selected based on theoretical constructs summarised in Tables 1 and 2 earlier, in order to derive inferences and/or gain understanding or draw conclusions from documents. 
Table 3 details the documents examined. 
Adding to the documents examined was quantitative performance measurement information obtained from both Alpha and Omega. 
Semi-structured interviews based on Bob Dick’s Convergent Interview method 1 were also held with personnel at Alpha and Omega involved at both service delivery and relationship management levels. 
Interviews focused on interviewees tracing through the relationship, identifying the main events that inﬂuenced the success or otherwise of the relationship, how the relationship changed over time, how and why new controls were introduced and how each party responded to these changes during the relationship. 
This qualitative technique was selected on the basis that it has been identiﬁed as being speciﬁcally suited to exploratory research of the type undertaken here. 
In the words of Driedger et al. (2006, p. 1146), adopting the method in a study of Internet-based inter-organisational relationships, it ‘can be usefully applied in under researched areas characterised by an absence or dearth of established theoretical and methodological foundations’. 
Rao and Perry (2003) outline the comparative strengths and weakness of the convergent interview method. 
Whilst the method has methodological weakness, particularly in relation of generalisability of ﬁndings and its limited use outside of Australian case study research (Driedger et al. 2006), we suggest that these can be addressed by adopting alternate data sources and methods (e.g. document analysis in this paper) in order to identify key themes that elaborate on existing incomplete theorisation. 
Its prior use in action research is only one way of applying the method to exploratory research (see Riege and Nair 2004). 
We interviewed participants from a number of levels within both the buyer and supplier ﬁrms in order to access different perspectives across and within the outsourcing ﬁrms. 
The focus was on representatives at the key organisational levels within Alpha and Omega directly responsible for outsourcing results during the term of the relationship. 
Hence, Relationship and Service Management was strongly represented in the interview sample (100% and 75%, Table 3. Case study dimensions – summary of archival documents analysed. 
Document type Number Minutes of meetings 25 Reports 1 Emails 11 Other – Total 37 Accounting and Business Research 513 Downloaded by [Open University Library - ISRAEL] at 11:28 28 October 2013 respectively). 
The only omission was a Service Manager who had left Omega by the time interviews were arranged. 
Thus, the substantive majority of key participants were interviewed and it was unlikely that new signiﬁcant information would become available. 
In total, 14 interviews with 11 interviewees were conducted across both organisations (see Table 4 for an outline of the distribution of interviews by level – three of the interviews were short, follow-up sessions to clarify or conﬁrm speciﬁc data). 
Our primary consideration in deciding the number of interviews was whether we had interviewed key participants (including those who had left Alpha or Omega at the time of data collection) and the amount of new information that additional interviews were providing (see also Ahrens and Chapman 2006). 
The sample of interviewees is summarised in Table 4. The interviews aimed to trace events over the life of the relationship. 
All interviews were conducted in person, tape-recorded, transcribed, coded and analysed using NVivo software to determine the extent to which they help in understanding the management control themes associated with outsourced services and the controls that evolve post contractually. 
Four questions were used to structure the interviews, without explicit boundaries or imposing preconceived categories that may have inhibited open-ended responses (see Fontana and Frey 2005). 
We used the following speciﬁc semi-structured convergent interview questions. 
What factors do you regard as important to the success of the outsourcing relationship? 
How do you manage these factors? 
What management control features are important to outsourcing relationship success and what are not as crucial? 
How did these features change as the outsource relationship developed? 
Why did changes occur? 
Was/is the outsource relationship successful and what criteria are used to determine this view? 
How has it changed as the outsource relationship has continued? 
The interviews were entirely conducted at research site premises and were largely attended by both authors. 
The results of this analysis are presented in the next section. 
This is organised both temporally and thematically in keeping with the objective of examining control evolution. 
Table 4. Case study dimensions – summary of interview coverage. 
Interviewee category Alpha Omega Total sample interviews (interviewees) Total population of interviewees no. and (%) Senior-level executives Number of interviews (interviewees) 2 (1) 2 (1) 4 (2) 8 (25%) Total duration (minutes) 96 78 174 Relationship managers Number of interviews (interviewees) 2 (2) 2 (2) 4 (4) 4 (100%) Total duration (minutes) 82 86 168 Service delivery managers Number of interviews (interviewees) 2 (2) 2 (1) 4 (3) 4 (75%) Total duration (minutes) 91 72 163 Operations staff Number of interviews (interviewees) 1 (1) 1 (1) 2 (2) 200 (1%) Total duration (minutes) 37 34 71 Total interviews (interviewees) 7 (6) 7 (5) 14 (11) Total duration 306 270 576 514 J. Rooney and S. Cuganesan Downloaded by [Open University Library - ISRAEL] at 11:28 28 October 2013 4. Results 4.1 Initial control arrangements Prior to establishing operations, the Alpha Chief Executive Ofﬁcer (CEO) utilised industry contacts to search for potential partners. 
After contacting three organisations, negotiations were commenced with Omega, focusing on the range and extent of the services to be outsourced and the terms of the outsourcing arrangement. 
A key decision criterion was rapid selection of an outsourced service provider that would allow Alpha to enter into a market dominated by established ﬁnancial institutions, avoid initial capital investments and access a lower cost structure and economies of scale of a larger outsource service provider. 
Beneﬁts of the relationship articulated by Alpha representatives emphasised service ﬂexibility and speed of response to both sales intermediaries and end mortgage customers. 
The Omega Chief Operating Ofﬁcer (COO) noted that initial relationship discussions carried an understanding that: (Alpha) would, wherever practical, adopt existing (Omega) process, so as to minimise disruption and effort and it was generally accepted that (Omega) at the time had a fairly effective and efﬁcient process and operation. 
Analysis of the initial outsourcing contract is presented in Table 5. A notable feature was a minimal speciﬁcation of service level requirements or related formal performance measures. 
Further, these limited performance measures, whether incorporated in the contract or within separate ‘service level agreements’, were not implemented. 
Personnel/cultural controls were also minimal as partner search, negotiation and post-agreement activities (induction and other collaborative activities) were not extensive. 
Action controls were contained in the contract document, but the extent to which these assigned responsibili ty to perform particular operational procedures was limited to speciﬁc ﬁnancial processes such as the timely forwarding of monies received from Alpha’s customers as part of loan administration and the immediate notiﬁcation of errors in loan processing. 
Thus, the Alpha–Omega relationship commenced with contractual controls dominating the inter-organisational MCS. 
As indicated in Table 5, the majority of the contract was devoted to deﬁning particular events that gave Alpha the right to end the relationship. 
These comprised Table 5. Alpha–Omega contract clause analysis. 
Keyword categories Alpha Ltd (# of clauses) Alpha Ltd (% of clauses) Appointment – describing the appointment of Omega and general scope of work including collection of monies, cash reconciliations and record keeping 411 Termination comprising deﬁning events and material clauses that allow either party to exit the relationship 21 55 Governance comprising reporting, escalation and review/audit processes 38 Responsibilities comprising compliance and material events of legal signiﬁcance that each party is contractually responsible for 411 Service levels comprising response times for speciﬁc events, errors and tolerances with penalties against these 411 Fees and charges applicable to the outsourcing arrangement comprising throughput/volumes and setoff amounts 25 Total 38 100 Accounting and Business Research 515 Downloaded by [Open University Library - ISRAEL] at 11:28 28 October 2013 terminations for speciﬁed causes, changes in ownership and a general right for Alpha to ‘terminate this agreement without any compensation to [Omega] in relation to any or all .. . 
immediately by notice in writing’. 
The Alpha COO explained this focus on relationship termination in terms of risks associated with Omega’s performance: Outsourcing brings its own risk. 
Given that Alpha outsourced a signiﬁcant and important part of its business, if the provider didn’t deliver, it could actually put the company out of business. 
With the contract in place, the Alpha–Omega outsourcing arrangement commenced. 
Both the Alpha CEO and the Omega COO managed the relationship for the ﬁrst few months. 
The day-today operations were managed at a team leader level and only escalated to the Alpha CEO and Omega COO if unable to be resolved at an operational level. 
At this very early stage of the relationship, such close involvement of senior Alpha and Omega executives was seen as an indication of the importance of the relationship and beneﬁcial in the sense that escalated issues could be quickly resolved by key decision-makers. 
However, given that Alpha was an ESF, this arrangement was seen by both parties as being short-term only until the appointmen t of operations management by Alpha with responsibility for both Alpha operations and management of the relationship with Omega. 
This shift in managerial capabilities within Alpha, along with emergent market opportunities, was to have signiﬁcant impact for the inter-organisational relationship. 
4.2 New managers, emerging market opportunities and inter-organisational effects Personnel changes occurred within Alpha approximately three months into the relationship. 
A COO was appointed to help provide a level of stability to the organisation. 
Explaining his appointment, the Alpha COO emphasised issues of control and risk: The biggest gap Alpha had was around operations and control. 
When Alpha was setup, we didn’t want our own operations but we needed to have somebody inside that could control that relationship and manage it. Particularly with mortgages. 
It’s one of those small, deep drops – you make a small mistake and it can cost you a lot of money. 
The new Alpha COO, very quickly after his appointment, indicated that a change was required. 
After discussing the initial intent to adopt Omega processes as far as practical, the Omega COO described the response of the new Alpha COO as follows: So I had that discussion with the Alpha COO and this was his response ‘Well that’s all nice but I want it done my way and I want it done now’. 
So that signalled an entire change in the relationship, then and there. 
One effect of this management change was the introduction of regular performance review meetings in the second year of the outsourcing contract. 
These performance review meetings required operational representatives from both ﬁrms to attend. 
Based on his prior experience, these meetings were run by the Omega Relationship Manager. 
The meetings focused on the resolution of individual service issues and the sharing of information on events that could potentially affect the service delivery of the home loan processing activity (such as sales or product initiatives that were expected to increase home loan application volumes). 
Concurrently, demand for home loans by customers without, or with impaired, credit history was expanding. 
In response, Alpha commenced offering loans that required minimal or no documentation that attested to the creditworthiness of the applicant (typically income generating ability and asset holdings). 
However, competition in these ‘low-doc/no-doc’ loan products was 516 J. Rooney and S. Cuganesan Downloaded by [Open University Library - ISRAEL] at 11:28 28 October 2013 ﬁerce, creating imperatives within Alpha for quicker loan approvals and faster and better loan processing once a loan had been approved. 
Complaints by customers to Alpha’s sales or customerfacing functions started to take on greater importance in the organisation as issues had to be resolved promptly. 
Against this backdrop, performance review meetings focused more on perceived problems in Omega’s loan processing services identiﬁed by Alpha’s customers or staff. 
The frequency and timing of these meetings became dictated by Alpha’s perceptions of Omega service delivery and the urgency of the customer complaints that needed to be addressed. 
In addition, the recently hired Alpha COO interacted directly with Omega operational team leaders to resolve urgent issues or issues that were not being resolved to his satisfaction. 
With this approach, Alpha staff saw a beneﬁt in having an outsourced partner as it allowed them to shift the responsibility for resolving problems to Omega. 
An Operations Manager at Alpha (reporting to the COO) explained the approach in managing service delivery problems: It’s easier [with outsourcing] to do something about the relationship. 
For example, if you have a nonperforming team-member, there’s a process you have to go through, whereas, externally, it’s much easier to ring someone [from Omega] and say ‘Fix it. There’s a problem. 
We don’t care how you ﬁx it and if it’s due to that person, it’s your issue not ours. 
You need to talk with your boss.’ Interviews emphasise that this approach was not just a COO preference, it was a ‘mandate’ signalled by the CEO to hold Omega more accountable for successful growth in business volume. 
The impact of these actions was that Omega experienced a shift in the relationship from the initial expectations and arrangements. 
Over time, Omega management began to identify morale problems amongst personnel working with Alpha. 
Investigati ons identiﬁed the cause as the frequent negative performance conversations that were being initiated by Alpha personnel, not just the COO directly. 
An Omega Team Leader (reporting to the Omega COO and responsible for loan customer service operations) explained: If all staff hear is negative feedback, they’re not going to try hard enough to improve. 
Lower morale translated into higher turnover amongst staff assigned to the Alpha relationship. 
Newer and more junior Omega staff were assigned to work on the Alpha relationship. 
With changes in Omega personnel, Alpha operational members increasingly attributed the problems of process breakdown and service delivery to poor skills and capabilities. 
The Alpha Operations Manager highlighted this concern: While Omega generally had some good staff, we felt that poorer performers were often put onto our accounts. 
Omega has two or three people that were quite good at what they did, who would do what we told them. 
If you got hold of them, it was great. 
These changes began to have consequences for the inter-organisational relationship and the mix of controls, as outlined in the next section. 
4.3 Additional process failures and contesting MCS redesign Late in the second year of the arrangement, Omega sought to introduce result controls into the relationship. 
Through its internal information systems, Omega tracked a number of dimensions of its loan processing activities. 
For Omega, performance measurement was a necessary part of its intra-organisational MCS and necessary for the management of customer relationships. 
Its COO summarised the rationale as follows: Accounting and Business Research 517 Downloaded by [Open University Library - ISRAEL] at 11:28 28 October 2013 A service provider needs to track service performance whether you have to or not. 
One, you should know if there’s an underlying problem so you can identify it more quickly. 
Two, it’s a subject that does get emotional. The emotional customer gets on the phone and suddenly, it gets escalated and management have to deal with it. It is always a frustration as ‘we’ve outsourced this thing and I’m still having to deal with it’. 
So, if you have stats, you can see if it’s signiﬁcant. 
If you have conﬁdence in the numbers, it doesn’t become an issue. 
However, Omega encountered disinterest when discussing the beneﬁts that performance measurement would bring. 
Alpha personnel explained this in terms of a preference for ﬂexibility and agility. 
The Alpha Operations Manager (reporting to the COO) noted: We wanted the ability to go beyond the contract in order to address market opportunities as the need arose. 
We did not want to be tied to bureaucratic processes. 
We wanted to talk about the potential for doing other activities with them in this whole new world. 
This preference for processes over measurement in response to new activities was consistent with practice within Alpha. 
For example, contained within an email on 6 May 2004 on home loan funds transfer (a process that was the responsibility of Alpha management): Following on from some issues received internally, the proposed procedures sent earlier have been revised – see marked up procedures. 
Consequently, the proposed new procedures apply to both NZ and Australia. 
Despite Alpha’s disinterest in performance measurement, Omega commenced the distribution of performance measurement information on a monthly basis. 
However, analysis of governance material indicated th at these metrics were not reviewed by Alpha and do not seem to have been taken into account in evaluating the service delivery performance of Omega. 
Instead, Alpha personnel preferred to focus on service delivery issues and coordination control problems. 
For example, in the minutes of the governance meeting for December 2004, the ﬁrst month of the KPIs summarised above, discussion of these KPIs was not record ed and, based on follow-up interviews, there was no recollection by any participant of them having been discussed. 
For an Omega operations representative (reporting to the COO and responsible for relationship support), this indicated a perception that formal performance measurement was somehow irrelevant: I’m not sure if (Alpha) believed them [performance measures] or not but ... they were never challenged. 
As indicated above, the control preferences of Alpha managers for enhanced procedures and a minimum of ﬁnancial targets over more complex non-ﬁnancial output controls is found in the intra-organisational controls within Alpha. 
For example, when creating a new line of credit product to meet Alpha’s growing new loan business volume in early 2004, the project plan created by Alpha ﬁnance staff to implement the change contained no reference to outcome controls. 
Rather, the ﬁnal project plan dated 22 March 2004 contains references to new procedures and reconciliation reporting (used to verify receipt of individual funding transfer transactions). 
Selected examples include the following: New process to be documented ... Pipeline report is to be amended to ensure more than one funding line can be displayed ... Anticipated Settlements Report to be amended to ensure more than one funding line can be displayed. 
518 J. Rooney and S. Cuganesan Downloaded by [Open University Library - ISRAEL] at 11:28 28 October 2013 Despite this resistance to output controls, Omega’s efforts to promote its way of representing performance continued. 
As noted in the previous section, stories from Alpha’s external customers would feature in the performance review meetings as indicators of Omega’s performance. 
In response, Omega began to present information from its customer complaints log maintained by its own operations call centre, seeking to contest Alpha’s stories from customers with numbers about customers. 
An Omega Operations Manager (reporting to the COO and responsible for phone service operations) recalled: Alpha’s problem was that they used to listen to anecdotal stuff rather than fact. 
We used to give them the facts and listen to the stories. 
How do you defend the stories? 
By the time it gets to me, I don’t know how true it is or not. 
Based on perceptions that customer performance was not being addressed by Omega, Alpha introduced its own ‘customer complaints register’ early in the third year of the relationship. 
Customer complaint categories were developed between Alpha and Omega, with complaints attributable to Omega comprising both ‘Service Error’ and ‘Service Delay’ categories. 
Based on the coding analysis, periods of unusually high complaint levels would result in increased communications between operational personnel of Alpha and Omega, unscheduled meetings as well as escalation to the monthly performance review meeting if considered not to be resolved. 
For the Alpha CEO, measurement of customer complaints was required in order to ensure the resolution of service problems and unmet expectations: It was almost like we would raise an end customer complaint, Omega would reject it, but the underlying issue wasn’t getting addressed. 
We started keeping stats on complaints so that it could be addressed speciﬁcally as opposed to just anecdotally. 
Customer complaint information and other problems visible to Alpha were used to initiate investigation of processes and the deﬁnition of operational procedures for Omega to follow. 
In this way, action controls were introduced into the relationship in more speciﬁc form than had occurred previously. 
This cycle of identifying process failures, joint analysis and the stipulation of new processes manifested in episodic fashion over the latter three years of the contract. 
Overall, once new or enhanced procedures were speciﬁed, quality control or process audits were not generally undertaken. 
Action controls operated largely as an ex-ante signalling device rather than as ex-post monitoring. 
As part of investigating identiﬁed failures in Omega’s processes, Alpha would often hire ‘industry experts’ as full-time employees. 
This was seen within Alpha as necessary if it was to have the knowledge and expertise to introduce new ways of working with Omega staff. 
Telephone customer service, project management, loan application processing and arrears collections were some examples where Alpha brought in new managerial and specialist capabilities. 
However, these new capabilities not only inﬂuenced the speciﬁcs of new action controls and procedures but also reshaped the activities that were outsourced. 
In the instances of loan application processing and arrears collections, the new experts recommended insourcing. 
New Alpha personnel thus had signiﬁcant effect not only for the controls used in the relationship but also on the scope of the outsourcing arrangement. 
However, even where functions were insourced, no additional results controls were adopted within Alpha. 
Throughout this phase of the relationship, some personnel/cultural controls were adopted in an attempt to achieve closer alignment of shared values and norms. 
Relationship building at an interpersonal level occurred through service breakdown analysis and action planning activities whereby personnel from Alpha and Omega met to discuss new product development, operational Accounting and Business Research 519 Downloaded by [Open University Library - ISRAEL] at 11:28 28 October 2013 cross-training or new IT projects. 
In addition, informal relationship activities such as ad hoc ‘catch up for coffee’ sessions (at both operational team leader and relationship manager levels) also occurred. 
Omega also arranged regular visits by Alpha representatives to its operations where the Alpha personnel presented the initiati ves that they were pursuing as a means of helping Omega to understand the Alpha business. 
These activities included sharing of Alpha management perceptions of desired customer service norms. 
However, interviewees from both Omega and Alpha did not consider these to have had particular impact on the manner in which the relationship manifested, as outlined below. 
4.4 Termination of the relationship The Alpha – Omega relationship was eventually terminated in 2006. 
Parties on both sides explained the decision on the basis of the signiﬁcant business volume growth during the period of the outsourcing relationship and perceived problems in Omega’s performance. 
According to the Alpha Operations Manager responsible for new business operations: Alpha just went through the roof as far as its progress is concerned and probably outpaced its growth in terms of Omega’s expectations on how high it would grow. 
Omega struggled ... probably the way Alpha’s demands increased, their products matrixes, the different things they were demanding. 
However, other factors relating to the acquisition of managerial capabilities during Alpha’s growth and as part of the speciﬁcation of new action controls in the Alpha–Omega relationship were also relevant. 
As Alpha grew it hired new executive managers from its competitors. 
These new staff members had knowledge of the cost of running similar ﬁnancial services businesses as well as industry/market contacts that could provide cost/pricing guidance. 
They began to voice concerns within Alpha about the price that Omega was charging on the basis that market prices were more competitive. 
When an Alph a Operations Manager responsible for selected insourced back ofﬁce operations quoted earlier reﬂected back on the end of the relationship: We had no ﬁnancial incentive to insource if the price had been more realistic. 
Alpha’s CEO and COO entered into negotiations with Omega about price reductions. 
However, no price reductions eventuated and Alpha executive management began to examine alternatives to the relationship to Omega. 
Insourcing was quickly identiﬁed as the preferable option. 
Alpha’s previous history of hiring specialists to remedy problems with Omega’s processes that resulted in insourcing particular activities was relevant here. 
The termination clauses of the original contract were used to provide notice to Omega and manage the transition to in-house performance of all loan processing activities. 
5. Discussion Prior accounting studies of ESF highlight the limited adoption of formal intra-organisational controls. 
In contrast, entering into inter-organisational relationships – a feature of ESFs – creates control concerns that arise from within the relationship, prompting the adoption of formal controls. 
ESF research to date is yet to consider how ESF control challenges interact with control concerns associated with inter-organisational relationships to inﬂuence the adoption of speciﬁc control mechanisms within an inter-organisational relationship involving an ESF outsource buyer. 
Consistent with prior academic interest in the relationship between ﬂexibility and control, the paragraphs below discuss these interactions. 
While limited adoption of formal controls addressed the intra-organisational challenges of Alpha, outsourcing of activities gave rise to an ‘object’ that required formal control; namely, 520 J. Rooney and S. Cuganesan Downloaded by [Open University Library - ISRAEL] at 11:28 28 October 2013 the Omega organisation that supplied the outsourced services. 
Our study examined how ESF control challenges and inter-organisational control concerns, inﬂuenced by the control preferences of Alpha managers (labelled as management background in the framework of Davila et al. 2009), affect the adoption of new controls. 
Table 6 presents actor interpretation of the reasons to adopt new control mechanisms, organised according to the ESF control challenge and inter-organisational control concern constructs identiﬁed earlier in the paper, and, in turn, aligned with the objective control deﬁnitions of Merchant (1985). 
As this table indicates, action controls were utilised extensively while result and personnel/ cultural controls were not. 
Hence, our discussion starts with the control challenges faced by Alpha to achieve adaptability to the business environment and resulting control ﬂexibility within an inter-organisational relationship. 
5.1 Flexibility, the outsourcing contract and avoidance of result controls There are signiﬁcant control challenges associated with achieving ESF requirements for business adaptability and control ﬂexibility arising from environmental uncertainty, ﬂuid managerial concerns and rapid learning about markets and capabilities. 
2 Resolution of these challenges within an inter-organisational relationship, absent alternate reasons to adopt controls, may be expected to give rise to the adoption of new personnel/cultural and results controls. 
Both control mechanisms are conducive to control ﬂexibility (Merchant 1985, Merchant and van der Stede 2003). 
Other research also identiﬁes this pattern (Frow et al. 2010). 
In contrast, ‘most action controls discourage creativity, innovation, and adaption’ (Merchant and van der Stede 2003, p. 220). 
However, we observe the consistent adoption of action controls in the Alpha/Omega case study. 
In terms of prior accou nting literature on the adoption of controls by ESFs, the role of contracts is largely seen as unimportant. 
Within ESFs, the argument is that ﬂexibility and agility may be afforded by limited formal controls and a reliance on personnel/cultural controls (see Collier 2005). 
However, entering into inter-organisational relationships often requires basic controls in the form of contracts, at least initially. 
Davila et al. (2009) argue that this is an external reason for an ESF to adopt a new control in response to its own control challenges. 
We observe this pattern within the Alpha/Omega case study with the addition of contractual clauses that contemplate ﬂexible relationship exit. 
To empirically examine these expectations informed by current theoretical frameworks, we address the ﬁndings summarised in Table 6, in control mechanism order from left to right. 
We start with the adoption of contract controls at the start of the Alpha/Omega relationship. 
In the Alpha case study, the outsourcing contract was designed to allow ﬂexibility. 
It was largely incomplete, stipulating what the parties were to do in the relationship (rather than the speciﬁcs of how operational processes were to be conducted) and creating possibilities for exit by either ﬁrm. 
The intent was to allow the ESF to exit the relationship should it need to, subject to notice. 
Arguably, Alpha was attempting to provide ﬂexibility in addressing any potential imbalance in power relations between the newly created ESF and the mature outsourcing supplier over the term of the outsourcing contract. 
In this, the contract acted as a formal control mechanism that allowed strategic ﬂexibility (entering/exiting the relationship). 
By showing how exit ﬂexibility is created through formalisation in the form of contractual controls, we contrast with prior research that typically promotes informal approaches as necessary for control ﬂexibility and the idea of ‘minimal structure [which leaves] ... sufﬁcient room of manoeuvre to enable the parties in lateral relations to act ﬂexibly, share information, exchange knowledge, create new knowledge, react to new situations and change leadership roles as necessary’ (van der Meer-Kooistra and Scapens 2008, p. 380). 
Hence, the conﬁguration of other types of ESF inter-organisational contracts (e.g. employment contracts and the use of equity incentives) Accounting and Business Research 521 Downloaded by [Open University Library - ISRAEL] at 11:28 28 October 2013 Table 6. Results based in the analytical framework. 
Control challenge/ concern The contract Action controls Results controls Personnel/cultural controls Adaptability/ ﬂexibility Termination clauses seen as useful by Alpha CEO to help manage risks of being tied to a supplier Dominance of operations specialists in performance review meetings leads to focus on the speciﬁcs of loan processes. 
A change in Alpha’s market position resulting in greater focus on customer and how loan processes affect them creates possibilities for action controls to be added. 
Re-speciﬁcation of who does what with progressive insourcing occurs with hiring of new experts Preference for strategic ﬂexibility, growth and less formal MCS by Alpha leads to lack of take-up of Omega’s outcome measures and absence of result controls in the inter-organisational MCS with exception of customer complaints measures Coordination New Alpha COO shapes possibilities for formal controls by implementing performance review meetings. 
Over time, implemented to codify new learnings that emerge out of continued episodes of processing breakdown, Alpha’s focus on customer complaints prompt the introduction of action controls in the form of stories from customers and experiences of Omega’s processes failing Cooperation Sets out a broad frame within which the relationship occurs Initially, action controls operate at a relationship level only Limited personnel/ cultural control attempted over time to align interests and values Dependency Termination clauses seen as useful by Alpha CEO to help manage risks of being tied to a supplier 522 J. Rooney and S. Cuganesan Downloaded by [Open University Library - ISRAEL] at 11:28 28 October 2013 and how these afford ﬂexibility alongside personnel/cultural controls are fruitful areas of future research. 
For Alpha, an ESF buyer ﬁrm, inability to describe operational processes in terms of what should be achieved (i.e. results controls) or how they should occur (i.e. action controls) was prevalent in the early lifecycle stage. 
Hence, at the start of the outsourcing relationship, Alpha relied on pre-existing processes provided by Omega. 
Alpha managers appeared to value this aspect early in the relationship as they attempted to enter the residential loan market with speed. 
In contrast, mature buyer ﬁrms arguably have a variety of elements of a control package to draw upon when deciding on their inter-organisational controls. 
This reasoning is behind much of the contingency-based frameworks that see particular conﬁgurations of control mechanisms or control patterns as deriving from conditions pertaining to the inter-organisational transaction environment (see Hakansson et al. 2010). 
Further, Alpha actively sought to avoid a more complete speciﬁcation of desired results over the life of the outsourcing arrangement. 
The justiﬁcation most cited by Alpha managers was that the ESF might need to prioritise different elements of its inter-organisational arrangements as part of repositioning itself in its external marketplace. 
We also note that concerns about Omega’s service response performan ce usually did not bring about the use of new results controls. 
Here, the internally focused controls within the ESF were relevant. 
Alpha management had limited performance measurement systems, emphasising revenue and customer growth. 
They also made little use of the range of results controls proposed by Omega, even when functions were insourced after initially being within the inter-organisational relationship. 
Davila et al . 
(2009) argue that such behaviour is consistent with an internal, proactive reason to adopt new controls driven by ESF management preference. 
Despite the advantages of results controls in preserving ﬂexibility (Merchant 1985, Merchant and van der Stede 2003), a key ESF control challenge, we argue that market opportunities, product offerings and, hence, business ‘results’ may themselves be uncertain and in ﬂux for an ESF such as Alpha (see Miller and Friesen 1983). 
The consequence is reluctance by the ESF to support results controls within inter-organisational relationships. 
This is consistent with the intra-organisational preferences of Alpha operational management. 
Results controls were resisted by Alpha managers, on the basis that they preferred to avoid bureaucratic processes that might constrain ﬂexibility in the search for business growth. 
We see this as inextricably linked to Alpha’s ESF nature including, as identiﬁed by Davila et al. (2009), the preferences of Alpha’s operations managers. 
While personnel/cultural controls were attempted within the outsourcing arrangement, managers at Alpha regarded them as unimportant or ineffective. 
These observations add to recent accounting literature highlighting that formal controls may provide organisational ﬂexibility in certain contexts (see Ahrens and Chapman 2004, Frow et al. 2010). 
Whilst adaptability and ﬂexibility needs combined to lead to incomplete contracting and minimal result controls for Alpha, its status as an ESF also meant more complete contracting around exit. 
Prior research on strategic alliances shows that ﬂexibility to respond to dynamic and changing environments is created through modiﬁcation of arrangements and through exit (Young-Ybarra and Wiersema 1999). 
However, accounting research examining the speciﬁc control mechanisms that ESF managers adopt when they seek ﬂexibility thorough formal controls is limited (see Volberda 1996, Graetz and Smith 2008). 
One exception is Sandino (2007), identifying how strategy inﬂuences the focus of the controls used. 
We add to this by suggesting that the intersection of imperatives to preserve ESF ﬂexibility with inter-organisational control concerns may not result in the adoption of results controls (at least in the early stages of ﬁrm existence) due in large part to the individual preferences of ESF managers. 
Figure 1 provides a representation of this pattern of ESF control challenges, interorganisational control concerns and control adoption discussed in the remaining of this section. 
Accounting and Business Research 523 Downloaded by [Open University Library - ISRAEL] at 11:28 28 October 2013 Based on the representation found in Figure 1, we next examine the role of action controls within the Alpha/Omega inter-organisational relationship in more detail. 
5.2 Action controls, management changes and path dependency Actions controls were increasingly adopted over the life of the outsourcing arrange ment between Alpha and Omega (see Figure 1 for selected examples). 
These controls were introduced through repeated modiﬁcations of stipulated processes in a ‘trial and error’ manner in response to identiﬁed instance of process failures and concerns about Omega’s performance. 
This observation is consistent with an interpretation that action controls will be adopted in inter-organisational contexts characterised by higher levels of coordination and appropriation concerns. 
However, action controls were not chosen simply in reaction to these inter-organisational concerns. 
Action controls were also shaped by the dominance of particular functional specialists within the ﬁrm (see Cuganesan 2006) as well as uncertainty found in Alpha’s chosen market. 
We argue that these control challenges form a path dependency that resulted in action controls dominating the mix of controls in the inter-organisational relationship involving an ESF buyer. 
This form of path dependency is consistent with Modell et al . 
(2007), in that the range of alternative actions is shaped and narrowed, but not wholly determined, by past choices. 
We differ in the sense that we examine the inﬂuence of individual actors rather than institutional processes. 
In particular, we argue that the emphasis placed on action controls was inﬂuenced by the role that operational specialists played in Alpha (a proactive reason to adopt new controls in the Davila et al. (2009) framework, based on manager preference) and learning (a reactive reason) about the Figure 1. Examples of case study control adoption events. 
524 J. Rooney and S. Cuganesan Downloaded by [Open University Library - ISRAEL] at 11:28 28 October 2013 outsourced processes. 
In the case study presented, operational personnel dominated inter-organisational interactions. 
This includes inﬂuence in shifting the initial decision to accept Omega’s processes to requiring compliance with processes as stipulated from time to time by Alpha. 
Perceptions that initial controls were not providing sufﬁcient support to functional requirements associated with product and service ﬂexibility began to manifest, leading to the adoption of additional action controls. 
Consequently, action controls were not just about enhancing coordination or countering appropriation problems, but were also adopted to enable learning from past management experience and the development of organisational capabilities (Nelson and Winter 1982, Lundberg 1995, Inkpen and Currall 2004). 
In the absence of established ESF control practice, the need to acquire experienced managers and experts to address capability gaps within the ESF brings their control preferences based on their prior experiences. 
This ﬁnding requires further examination of the business uncertainties facing Alpha management. 
During the outsourcing arrangement, there was increasing sophistication within Alpha’s marketplace for home loan product and service offerings. 
This, in turn, attracted new customer demands. 
Growth of business volumes necessitated increased demand for product development support. 
3 Further, as indicated in the results section, competition in the niche loan products offered by Alpha was increasing, creating an operational imperative within Alpha for quicker loan approvals and faster loan processing. 
Early business growth resulted in realisation by Alpha that continued growth depended on improvement in product development and customer service. 
A pattern of new processes (action controls) to drive increased product development and customer service thus emerged, connected to strategic imperatives for ongoing business growth (a proactive reason to adopt new formal controls in the Davila et al. (2009) framework given a lack of suitable systems). 
We argue that structuring of interactions from the outset of the relationship inﬂuenced the way problems were conceived of, being seen as ineffective or incomplete processes needing alteration. 
Initially, Alpha required access to expert industry resources to assist with start-up of the ﬁrm in the home loan lending industry. 
However, subsequent interactions between Alpha and Omega became increasingly focused on discussing problems of perceived failure in processes, further facilitating the reactive control response (an internal focus in terms of the Davila et al. (2009) framework) to ﬁxing problems that occurred. 
In turn, with increased questioning of Omega processes and perceived failure in performance, Omega personnel saw Alpha as being uncooperative following frequent negative feedback provided by Alpha operational management. 
Hence, a preference for action controls by Alpha management had reciprocal effects on perceptions of inter-organisational cooperation. 
Hence, inter-organisational control dynamics and, indeed, the organisational scope of the outsourcing arrangement were strongly inﬂuenced by new operations management capabilities hired by Alpha over the life of the arrangement. 
Where particular functional specialists dominate, combined with the control challenges faced by an ESF, adoption of particular types of controls problematise the control concerns of ESF involved in an inter-organisational relationship, leading to more of the same types of controls being adopted. 
This is consistent with prior research ﬁndings on intra-organisational control in an ESF context, where the implementation of new controls is most frequently associated with new managers being hired into the ﬁrm and their particular prior experiences and knowledge (Davila et al. 2009). 
We argue that ESFs are likely to be charac terised by speciﬁc managers or functional specialists dominating control adoption due to the small number of managers/employees and consequent narrow functional backgrounds. 
These ﬁndings reinforce the multi-faceted nature of controls and the purposes for which they are used (Simons 1995, Ferreira and Otley 2009). 
Patterns observed here are also consistent with the notion of action controls in ESFs as enabling ‘organisational members [to] experiment with different ways of executing processes until a satisfactory solution is found, which is then codiﬁed’ Accounting and Business Research 525 Downloaded by [Open University Library - ISRAEL] at 11:28 28 October 2013 (Davila and Foster 2005, p. 27). 
It also indicates a path dependency of ESF linked to control challenges and manager experience prior to involvement with the ESF in the adoption of controls when responding to inter-organisational control concerns. 
Whilst identiﬁed as an empirical category rather than a theory (see Kay 2005), path dependency highlights the role of manager interpretation of the performance of the object of control, namely, the inter-organisational relationship. 
This interpretation is made in comparison to ESF requirements for organisational adaptability, control ﬂexibility and the resolution of inter-organisational control concerns. 
As the trade-offs between these requirements are being clariﬁed and better understood by actors in the relationship, the past experiences of these actors inﬂuence the adoption of new controls. 
Indeed, given mixed ﬁndings and the inconclusiveness of prior research (Caglio and Ditillo 2008), we argue that the process of control adoption within inter-organisational relationships involving ESF buyer ﬁrms may be better understood not by adding to a list of contingent variables but through a more detailed study of the path-dependent nature of control adoption within established management control theoretical frameworks. 
6. Conclusion This paper seeks to address a gap in the literature relating to the adoption of management controls within an inter-organisational relationship involving an ES F buyer of outsourcing services. 
Within the limits of a single case study, we observe ESF control challenges associated with adaptability and ﬂexibility being considered simu ltaneously with inter-organisational control concerns to shape the adoption of formal controls within an inter-organisational relationship. 
At the same time, managerial preferences and the dominance of particular functional specialists not only created conditions of possibility for action controls but also led to their ongoing emphasis over time. 
Adding to this was the contract, which was conﬁgured to allow Alpha ﬂexibility in exiting the inter-organisational relationship. 
These ﬁndings extend the existing inter-organisational control literature by highlighting the need to balance control ﬂexibility observed within ESFs with formal controls in response to inter-organisational concerns. 
They emphasise the possibility of more complete investigation of the role and interaction of actors, controls and the business uncertainty experienced by ESFs. 
In particular, attention is required to ESF path dependencies in understanding ‘reasons for control adoption’ that inﬂuen ce both ‘upstream’ and ‘downstream’ in the inter-organisational relationship. 
As identiﬁed in Modell et al. (2007), this concept supports an empirical focus on change whilst mitigating the risk of historical determinism when adopted in conjunction with relevant theory. 
Surprisingly, it is rarely examined in the management accounting literature. 
The need for such attention is consistent with recent examples of an increasing focus on the dynamics of control change (Velez et al. 2008, Vosselman and van der Meer-Kooistra 2009). 
Further empirical research may show how inter-organisational controls can support change rather than order and stability consistent with the ESF need for outsourcing within complex supply chain networks (also found in mature ﬁrms, see Chua and Mahama 2007, Thrane 2007). 
This also has important implications for practitioners. 
While a speed-to-market imperative may mean limited pre-alliance activities, the pursuit of growth opportunities requires ﬂexibility and adaptability. 
To facilitate this, ﬁrms can examine a combination of contracts and other formal controls to achieve ESF strategi c business needs. 
In closing, the limitations of this study need to be noted. 
First, only one outsourcing relationship was explored for the purposes of this paper, placing limits on the generalisability of its ﬁndings. 
Second, the historical nature of the analysis places constraints on the data obtained with a possibility that signiﬁcant events or issues have been overlooked in our presentation of results. 
Third, there has been no consideration of the performance implications of utilising different 526 J. Rooney and S. Cuganesan Downloaded by [Open University Library - ISRAEL] at 11:28 28 October 2013 control mechanisms to govern inter-organisational relationships. 
These limitations represent lines of inquiry for further research within the theoretical framework and path dependent empirical analysis explored in this paper. 
Acknowledgements The authors wish to acknowledge and thank the current and immediate past ABR Editors (Professors Vivien Beattie and Pauline Weetman respectively), Associate Editor (Professor Sven Modell) and two anonymous reviewers for their helpful and constructive comments. 
We also wish to thank Fiona Crawford from the University of Sydney for her insightful editorial assistance. 
Notes 1. Refer to website: www.scu.edu.au/schools/gcm/ar/arp/iview.html. 
The only difference to his recommended approach is to digitally (voice) record all interviews. 
2. We do not suggest that such imperatives are absent from mature ﬁrms. 
Rather, we highlight that the ESF is arguably more exposed to these inﬂuences. 
3. For Alpha, business growth was higher than industry average, reﬂecting a measure of success in achieving Alpha’s strategy of exploiting gaps in the residential home loan market. 
Annualised industry growth at the same time was between 10% and 15%. 
References Adler, P.S. and Borys, B., 1996. 
Two types of bureaucracy: enabling and coercive. 
Administrative Science Quarterly, 41 (1), 61–89. 
Ahrens, T. and Chapman, C., 2004. 
Accounting for ﬂexibility and efﬁciency: a ﬁeld study of management control systems in a restaurant chain. 
Contemporary Accounting Research, 21 (2), 271–301. 
Ahrens, T. and Chapman, C.S., 2006. 
Doing qualitative ﬁeld research in management accounting: positioning data to contribute to theory. 
Accounting, Organizations and Society, 31 (8), 819–841. 
Anderson, S.W., Christ, M.H., Dekker, H.C. and Sedatole, K.L., 2011. 
Risk management in strategic alliances: ﬁeld evidence. 
Working Paper, Graduate School of Management, University of California Davis. 
Auzair, S.M. and Langﬁeld-Smith, K., 2005. 
The effect of service process type, business strategy and lifecycle stage on bureaucratic MCS in service organizations. 
Management Accounting Research, 16 (4), 399–421. 
Busquets, J., Rodon, J., and Wareham, J., 2009. 
Adaptability in smart business networks: an exploratory case in the insurance industry. 
Decision Support Systems, 47 (4), 287–296. 
Caglio, A. and Ditillo, A., 2008. 
A review and discussion of management control in inter-ﬁrm relationships: achievements and future directions. 
Accounting, Organizations and Society, 33 (7/8), 865–898. 
Cardinal, L.B., Sitkin, S.B., and Long, C.P., 2004. 
Balancing and rebalancing in the creation and evolution of organisational control. 
Organizational Science, 15 (4), 411–431. 
Chua, W.F. and Mahama, H., 2007. 
The effect of network ties on accounting controls in a supply alliance: ﬁeld study evidence. 
Contemporary Accounting Research, 24 (1), 47–86. 
Collier, P.M., 2005. 
Entrepreneurial control and the construction of a relevant accounting. 
Management Accounting Research, 16 (3), 321–339. 
Cuganesan, S., 2006. 
The role of functional specialists in shaping controls within supply networks. 
Accounting, Auditing and Accountability Journal, 19 (4), 465–492. 
Davila, A., 2005. 
An exploratory study on the emergence of management control systems: formalizing human resources in small growing ﬁrms. 
Accounting, Organizations and Society, 30 (3), 223–248. 
Davila, A. and Foster, G., 2005. 
Management accounting adoption decisions: evidence and performance implications from startup companies. 
The Accounting Review, 82 (4), 907–937. 
Davila, A., Foster, G., and Li, M., 2009. 
Reasons for management control systems adoption: insights from product development systems choice by early-stage entrepreneurial companies. 
Accounting, Organizations and Society, 34 (3–4), 322–347. 
Dekker, H.C., 2004. 
Control of inter-organisational relationships: evidence on appropriation concerns and coordination requirements. 
Accounting, Organizations and Society, 29 (1), 27–49. 
Accounting and Business Research 527 Downloaded by [Open University Library - ISRAEL] at 11:28 28 October 2013 Dekker, H.C., 2008. 
Partner selection and governance design in interﬁrm relationships. 
Accounting, Organizations and Society, 33 (7/8), 915–941. 
Driedger, S.M., Gallois, C., Sanders, C.B., and Santesso, N., 2006. 
Finding common ground in team-based qualitative research using the convergent interviewing method. 
Qualitative Health Research, 16 (8), 1145–1157. 
Dyer, J.H. and Hatch, N.W., 2006. 
Relation-speciﬁc capabilities and barriers to knowledge transfers: creating advantage through network relationships. 
Strategic Management Journal, 27 (8), 701–719. 
Easterby-Smith, M., Lyles, M.A., and Tsang, E.W.K., 2008. 
Inter-organizational knowledge transfer: current themes and future prospects. 
Journal of Management Studies, 45 (4), 677–690. 
Eisenhardt, K.M., 1989. 
Building theories from company study research. 
Academy of Management Review, 14 (4), 532–550. 
Euromonitor, 2003. 
Commercial Banking in Australia. 
Sydney: Euromonitor International. Feldman, M.S. and Pentland, B.T., 2003. 
Reconceptualizing organizational routines as a source of ﬂexibility and change. 
Administration Science Quarterly, 48 (1), 94–118. 
Ferreira, A. and Otley, D., 2009. 
The design and use of performance management systems: an extended framework for analysis. 
Management Accounting Research, 20 (4), 263–282. 
Fontana, A. and Frey, J.H., 2005. 
The Interview: From Neutral Stance to Political Involvement, in Sage Handbook of Qualitative Research. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 
Frow, N., Marginson, D., and Ogden, S., 2010. 
‘Continuous’ budgeting: reconciling budget ﬂexibility with budgetary control. 
Accounting, Organizations and Society, 35 (4), 444–461. 
Graetz, F. and Smith, A.C.T., 2008. 
The role of dualities in arbitrating continuity and change in forms of organizing. 
International Journal of Management Reviews, 10 (3), 265–280. 
Granlund, M. and Taipaleenmaki, J., 2005. 
Management control and controllership in new economy ﬁrms – a life cycle perspective. 
Management Accounting Research, 16 (1), 21–57. 
Greiner, L.E., 1972. 
Evolution and revolution as organizations grow. 
Harvard Business Review, 50 (4), 37–46. 
Guthrie, J., Petty, R., Yongvanich, K., and Ricceri, F., 2004. 
Using content analysis as a research method to inquire into intellectual capital reporting. 
Journal of Intellectual Capital, 5 (2), 282–293. 
Hakansson, H., Kraus, K., and Lind, J., eds., 2010. 
Accounting in Networks. 
London: Routledge. 
Helfat, C.E. and Peteraf, M.A., 2003. 
The dynamic resource-based view: capability lifecycles. 
Strategic Management Journal, 24 (10), 997–1010. 
Henri, J.F., 2006. 
Management control systems and strategy: a resource-based perspective. 
Accounting, Organizations and Society, 31 (6), 529–558. 
Inkpen, A.C. and Currall, S.C., 2004. 
The coevolution of trust, control, and learning in joint ventures. 
Organization Science, 15 (5), 586–599. 
Jacobs, K., 2012. 
Making sense of social practice: theoretical pluralism in public sector accounting research. 
Financial Accountability and Management, 28 (1), 267–292. 
Jarzabkowski, P.A., Li, J.K., and Feldman, M.S., 2012. 
Toward a theory of coordinating: creating coordinating mechanisms in practice. 
Organization Studies, 23 (4), 907–927. 
Kamoche, K. and Cunha, M.P., 2001. 
Minimal structures: from jazz improvisation to product innovation. 
Organization Studies, 22 (5), 733–764. 
Kay, A., 2005. 
A critique of the use of path dependency in policy studies. 
Public Administration, 83 (3), 553–571. 
Kim, J.W. and Higgins, M.C., 2007. 
Where do alliances come from? 
The effects of upper echelons on alliance formation. 
Research Policy, 36 (4), 499–514. 
Krippendorff, K., 1980. 
Content Analysis: An Introduction to its Methodology. 
Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 
Langﬁeld-Smith, K. and Smith, D., 2003. 
Management control systems and trust in outsourcing relationships. 
Management Accounting Research, 14 (3), 281–307. 
Li, G., Yang, H., Sun, L., Ji, P., and Feng, L., 2010. 
The evolutionary complexity of complex adaptive supply networks: a simulation and case study. 
International Journal of Production Economics, 124 (2), 310–330. 
Lundberg, C.C., 1995. 
Learning in and by organizations: three conceptual issues. 
International Journal of Organizational Analysis, 3 (1), 10–24. 
Mahama, H., 2006. 
Management control systems, cooperation and performance in strategic supply relationships: a survey in the mines. 
Management Accounting Research, 17 (3), 315–339. 
Malmi, T. and Brown, D.A., 2008. 
Management control systems as a package – opportunities, challenges and research directions. 
Management Accounting Research, 19 (4), 287–300. 
van der Meer-Kooistra, J. and Scapens, R.W., 2008. 
The governance of lateral relations between and within organizations. 
Management Accounting Research, 19 (4), 365–384. 
528 J. Rooney and S. Cuganesan Downloaded by [Open University Library - ISRAEL] at 11:28 28 October 2013 Merchant, K.A., 1985. 
Control in Business Organizations. 
Boston, MA: Pitman. 
Merchant, K.A. and van der Stede, W.A., 2003. 
Management Control Systems, Performance Measurement, Evaluation and Incentives. 
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 
Metters, R., 2008. 
A typology of offshoring and outsourcing in electronically transmitted services. 
Journal of Operations Management, 26 (2), 198–211. 
Miller, D. and Friesen, P.H., 1983. 
Successful and unsuccessful phases of the corporate lifecycle. 
Organization Science, 4 (4), 339–356. 
Modell, S., 2010. 
Bridging the paradigm divide in management accounting research: the role of mixed methods approaches. 
Management Accounting Research, 21 (2), 124–129. 
Modell, S., Jacobs, K., and Wiesel, F., 2007. 
A process (re)turn? 
Path dependencies, institutions and performance management in Swedish central government. 
Management Accounting Research, 18 (4), 453–475. 
Mouritsen, J., Hansen, A., and Hansen, C.O., 2001. 
Interorganizational controls and organizational competencies: episodes around target cost management/functional analysis and open book accounting. 
Management Accounting Research, 12 (2), 221–244. 
Nelson, R.R. and Winter, S.G., 1982. 
An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Ouchi, W., 1979. 
A conceptual framework for the design of organizational control mechanisms. 
Management Science, 25 (9), 833–848. 
Pagell, M. and Krause, D.R., 2004. 
Re-exploring the relationship between ﬂexibility and the external environment. 
Journal of Operations Management, 21 (6), 629–649. 
Patel, P.C., 2011. 
Role of manufacturing ﬂexibility in managing duality of formalization and environmental uncertainty in emerging ﬁrms. 
Journal of Operations Management, 29 (1 –2), 143–162. 
Rajapakse, P.J., 2006. 
Assessment of law and practice relating to the mortgage origination process in securitisation programs. 
Journal of Law and Financial Management, 5 (1), 18–59. 
Rao, S. and Perry, C., 2003. 
Convergent interviewing to build a theory in under-researched areas: principles and an example investigation of internet usage in inter-ﬁrm relationships. 
Qualitative Market Research: An International Journal, 6 (4), 236–247. 
Riege, A.M. and Nair, G., 2004. 
The diversity of convergent interviewing: applications for early researchers and postgraduate students. 
Marketing Review, 4 (1), 73–85. 
Sandino, T., 2007. 
Introducing the ﬁrst management control systems: evidence from the retail sector. 
Accounting Review, 82 (1), 265–293. 
Seal, W., 2004. 
Towards an enabling research agenda for the accounting/contracting nexus. 
Accounting Forum, 28 (4), 329–348. 
Silvola, H., 2008. 
Do organizational lifecycle and venture capital investors affect the management control systems used by the ﬁrm? 
Advances in Accounting, Incorporating Advances in International Accounting, 24 (1), 128–138. 
Simons, R.A., 1995. 
Levers of Control: How Managers Use Innovative Control Systems to Drive Strategic Renewal. Boston: Harvard Business School Press. 
Thrane, S., 2007. 
The complexity of management accounting change: bifurcation and oscillation in schizophrenic interorganisational systems. 
Management Accounting Research, 18 (2), 248–272. 
Velez, M.L., Sanchez, J.M., and Alvarez-Dardet, C., 2008. 
Management control systems as inter-organizational trust builders in evolving relationships: evidence from a longitudinal case study. 
Accounting, Organizations and Society, 33 (7/8), 968–994. 
Volberda, H.W., 1996. 
Toward the ﬂexible form: how to remain vital in hypercompetitive environments. 
Organisation Science, 7 (4), 359–374. 
Vosselman, E. and van der Meer-Kooistra, J., 2009. 
Accounting for control and trust building in interﬁrm transactional relationships. 
Accounting, Organizations and Society, 34 (2), 267–283. 
Wouters, M. and Wilderom, C., 2008. 
Developing performance-measurement systems as enabling formalization: a longitudinal ﬁeld study of a logistics department. 
Accounting, Organizations and Society,33 (4–5), 488–516. 
Yin, R.K., 1994. 
Case Study Research: Design and Methods. 
London: Sage. 
Young-Ybarra, C. and Wiersema, M., 1999. 
Strategic ﬂexibility in information technology alliances: the inﬂuence of transaction cost economics and social exchange theory. 
Organization Science, 10 (4), 439–459. 
Accounting and Business Research 529 Downloaded by [Open University Library - ISRAEL] at 11:28 28 October 2013 