Academy of Marketing Studies Journal, Volume 17, Number 1, 2013 
INTRODUCTION Companies are always seeking opportunities to improve their bottom-line. 
The current volatile economy has only increased the intensity with which such opportunities are sought, evaluated, and implemented. 
Among several decisions that a company may be faced with, optimizing supply chains is becoming ever more critical to improving operations. 
Very frequently decision-support tools grounded in advanced statistics and mathematical modeling are employed to help with the decision-making process. 
Among several levers that a company can operate to optimize its supply chain, identifying the optimal retail price of the products is crucial. The price of a product is a function of several costs, such as procurement, inventory, transportation, and marketing, and the expected profit margin. 
One would think that if all factors remaining unchanged, raising price will raise profit margin. 
However, academic literature and industry practice suggests that price increase is almost always accompanied with demand decrease. 
The price elasticity of demand is a frequently used metric to quantify the reduction in demand for a unit increase in price. 
Models exists that can help determine the optimal price of a product if the demand is elastic to price. 
The assumption in most of these models is that enough transactional data exists to help determine the elasticity value based on statistical analysis. 
Though the advancement in information technology has helped in collecting ample data, there are limitations to statistical analysis when SKU counts are very high and transactions per SKU per time period are limited. 
There are several commercial sectors where transactional data is too limited to derive statistically significant elasticity values. 
One such segment is wholesale distribution where we observed both Academy of Marketing Studies Journal, Volume 17, Number 1, 2013 of these phenomena. 
Through a case study we share insights gained by analyzing their data and deriving elasticity values for several products. 
We indicate that traditional models for price optimization may not be appropriate in such instances and sound heuristic approaches to price improvement may be required. 
The case background is a U.S. national retail network of non-perishable products, with hundreds of retail outlets. 
Local management has significant autonomy with respect to items carried, prices, and inventory policies. 
At the national level, management is responsible for sourcing, distribution, back office support, advisory, and monitoring services to improve performance of the overall network. 
A central information systems (IS) service provides back office support through the company’s commercial ERP system. 
Prices are set at the local level by applying a gross margin percentage (product markup) to product families in the ERP’s pricing matrix. 
Price levels have been established informally at the local level with little guidance from analytic approaches. 
The ERP system captures detailed point-of-sales (POS) data with several years of history available. 
Currently the overall organization is profitable, yet central management believes there is potential to improve profitability even further with a more systematic approach to setting prices at the local level, particularly given substantial disparity in performance levels between retail locations in markets deemed comparable in potential. This paper presents a systematic approach for price improvement recommendations in this context. 
Our contributions are two-fold: 1. Using a systematic approach towards analyzing actually sales data, we attempt to determine the price elasticity values. 
We identified several product family and customer type combinations where the demand seems to behave independently of price.. 
Using a theoretical break-even analysis, we suggest an approach to share with the management insights on the effect of the direction and degree of price change on overall company profitability. 
2. To help such managers actually realize benefits, we propose an intuitive and easy-to-implement heuristic to improve their price performance, and in turn their bottom-line. 
We first review relevant literature, followed by discussion of the methods employed to develop recommended changes for local-level pricing matrices. 
In the final section we present conclusions to this case study including potential generalizations from this research. 
LITERATURE REVIEW Price management is an important area for performance improvement in a retail setting. 
A traditional approach to setting retail prices is “cost plus” or adding a constant percentage increase to input costs (Shipley & Jobber, 2001). 
This approach is relatively simple and can be applied with minimal reliance on data and models, which makes the approach attractive in many retail contexts where IS support is limited and managers lack the sophistication to understand and implement more technical approaches. 
As IS support in this realm has become stronger, Academy of Marketing Studies Journal, Volume 17, Number 1, 2013 traditional cost plus pricing is being supplanted by more theoretically sound approaches to price setting. 
Wal-Mart was an early proponent the everyday low pricing (EDLP) approach, which targeted steady price levels both at the retail and wholesale level (Howell, 2005). 
The intent of the EDLP model was to reduce promotional activity at both retail and wholesale levels, improving flow in the supply chain, which reduces the bullwhip effect and therefore reduces cost levels particularly upstream in the supply chain (Lee, Padmanabhan, & Whang, 1997). 
While the EDLP pricing strategy has been successfully implemented in practice, several problems with this approach have been identified. 
It may be quite difficult to identify a product price levels that can be maintained at a steady level as the EDLP model requires, leading Wal-Mart to employ promotional pricing at times to reduce excess stock (Troy, 1997). 
Kmart also dropped the EDLP model due to implementation problems (Troy, 2002). 
Hoch et al. (1994) found substantial benefits Hi Low pricing over EDLP pricing in a series of field experiments. 
In this context the findings suggest that customers were much less price sensitive than perceived by the advocates of EDLP. 
This study however did not consider the benefits upstream in the supply chain. 
An implication of this study is the important challenge of setting optimal category prices in the EDLP context. 
Since prices are intended to relatively static, errors can be expensive. 
There has been extensive research on pricing under uncertainty, usually identified as the newsvendor problem. 
In this problem, the retailer must make a stocking decision prior to realizing random demand for a perishable product in a single selling period. 
Optimal solutions to this problem involve balancing cost of shortage and cost of excess inventory. 
This problem can be extended to a multiple-period horizon through dynamic programming. 
These models are useful when customer price sensitivity is well defined (Petruzzi & Dada, 1999). 
A number of papers have proposed optimal pricing models in different contexts generally built on the newsvendor logic and supply chain considerations. 
Chen and Federgruen (2001) model a two stage supply chain with deterministic demand serviced by retailers in distinct markets. 
When retailers and the wholesaler separately set price for optimal profit, the system is suboptimal, which is described as the double marginalization problem. 
Integrated solutions can improve profitability along the supply chain, although these integrated decisions can be analytically difficult due to nonconvexity in problem formulation (Sherali, Desai, & Glickman, 2008). 
A more recent stream of work in this area has focused on integrating pricing and inventory replenishment decisions in the context of dynamically changing prices (Elmaghraby & Keskinocak, 2003). 
This stream of research suggests that there is value to updating price through the demand cycle based on revealed information when demand is stochastic, thus utilizing price as a demand management tool to increase overall profitability. 
Boyaci and Gallego (2002) modeled a two-echelon supply chain with a single wholesaler supplying multiple retailers facing deterministic price-sensitive demand. 
Analysis of this model suggests that separate lot sizing and price decisions are suboptimal when demand is low. 
Separate inventory management policies such as vendor managed inventory are necessary to optimize overall profit Academy of Marketing Studies Journal, Volume 17, Number 1, 2013 under decentralized control. 
Hamister and Suresh (2008) propose a dynamic pricing model that improves retailer performance when retail demand is autocorrelated. 
Chen et al. (2010) found that dynamic pricing improves profitability for the retailer, but also affects the functional form of demand experienced by the retailer. 
A gap to the practical implementation of the above pricing models is that customer demand functions are assumed to be known and can be described mathematically. 
These assumptions are reasonably valid in many contexts, particularly for fast-moving consumer goods where there are a large number of separate transactions that tend to be statistically predictable. 
Category management has been suggested as a managerial improvement under these circumstances (Richard A. Gooner, Morgan, & Perreault, 2011). 
Category management is defined as “the distributor/supplier process of managing categories as strategic business units, producing enhanced business results by focusing on delivering consumer value (Blattberg & Fox, 1995).” Retail products are divided into a set of product categories, with each category managed as a strategic business unit within the enterprise. 
The retailer consists of multiple physical locations with each location serving one or more customer segments. 
Each product category is served by a supply network, with one of the suppliers designated as a Category Captain (CC). 
The CC plays a key role in the planning and implementation of merchandising plans for the category, including decisions on product selection, placing, promotion, and pricing. 
Each category is also supported by a distribution network and appropriate information exchange between trading partners. 
Category plans are formulated with a great deal of input from the Category Captain. 
Retailers face the risk that plans will favor the Category Captain’s products over alternative suppliers’ products at the risk of reducing overall category performance. 
As such, retailer trust in the CM process was found to be an antecedent to plan implementation. 
Past research has also considered the impact of this close relationship with key suppliers finding a tendency to reduce performance of minor suppliers (Richard A Gooner, 2001). 
Category management is effective in pricing when the CC has access to extensive demand data through the retail POS system and demand functions are well behaved. 
Davenport (2006) describes data analytics as a “killer app” that has great potential for creating competitive analysis for organizations. 
Data analytics involves the systematic collection and analysis of detailed information extracted from organizational and interorganizational information systems, generally involving the use of optimization techniques described above applied to analytical models based on actual data. 
Analytic approaches have been applied extensively in the evaluation of complex financial instruments (e.g., (Jia-Hau, Mao-Wei, & LehChyan, 2009; Mazzoni, 2010; Miller & Platen, 2008). 
Yeoman (2009) provides an overview of the use of data analytics in a retail pricing context. 
In this review, revenue management models should support improved decisions through modeling: demand seasonality, normalization of data for independent factors, identification of complements and substitutes, segmentation, and prediction of price elasticities. 
These analytical approaches generally require extensive transaction histories in order to isolate the various factors that affect demand. 
Academy of Marketing Studies Journal, Volume 17, Number 1, 2013 No research to date has been published to our knowledge to guide managers in pricing decisions when demand is relatively infrequent and difficult to describe statistically, and the retailer offers a very large number of products where individual item analysis is difficult. 
Our paper considers the case of a distribution network where unit demand levels tend to be low and difficult to describe with statistical distributions with reasonable accuracy. 
Furthermore, we also observe that the relationship between price and demand (i.e., elasticity) is difficult to establish, which renders traditional price optimization models based on constant elasticity assumptions non-applicable. 
To improve pricing performance at such companies, we present an alternative, heuristic approach when demand is not-so-well-behaved with price and/or when statistically significant elasticity values are difficult to obtain. 
METHODS In this section we detail our experience analyzing data at this company and the practical challenges we faced in trying to determine the optimal product prices. 
This led us to develop an intuitive, easy-to-implement, and yet theoretically sound heuristic for pricing improvement. 
ANALYZE EXISTING PRICE DATA Our first analysis occurred at the SKU level to determine the demand function for individual products at several example retail locations. 
The purpose of this analysis was to determine price sensitivity of demand to better determine directional change in price levels. 
To develop some insights into how products were priced at different demand levels, we plotted the number of units sold per transaction against unit price (averaged monthly). 
Figure 1 shows a plot of units sold per transaction and monthly-averaged unit price for a product (top 5 from a sales volume perspective) at a retailer. 
Observe the rather inconsistency in the price charged for this product for transactions with the same number of units sold. 
Given that this relationship is static (i.e., does not account for possible demand autocorrelations), we decided to investigate this further using time-series models. 
We adopted a time-series model specification using one-period autoregression to estimate price sensitivity. 
Time series methods were chosen to account for the potentially dynamic nature of demand in this market and “partial out” spurious relationships between price and units sold (Hamister & Suresh, 2008). 
The function takes the form: Demand t = a + b*P t + c*Demand t-1 + error (1) Academy of Marketing Studies Journal, Volume 17, Number 1, 2013 Figure 1. Price-Demand relationship for a product sold at one of the retailers. 
The above function states that demand during period t is a function of price during the period and also the demand in the prior period, plus an error term that represents unpredicted demand. 
POS data is captured on a transactional basis. 
Our first analytical decision was to determine an appropriate aggregation of data to develop demand functions. 
We “bucketed” transactions by one week periods, two week periods, and months to determine the interval that best fits the data. 
Since prices varied with each transaction we adopted average price in the period as our variable P. Results from weekly and biweekly buckets were substantially the same as monthly buckets, and given the relatively infrequent transactions, we believe monthly bucketing is most appropriate for both analytical and managerial purposes. 
Our next step was to examine a series of regression analyses using equation (1) as our specification. 
We selected a retailer from the network with which to conduct this analysis. 
The retailer chosen was considered as representative of average performance based on market and profitability by our management contacts. 
Results for these regression analyses are presented in Table 1 below. 
We selected SKU’s with the highest numbers of transactions for the prior 12month period for analysis. 
High transaction volumes were needed for adequate statistical estimation. 
. 
25.0 27.0 29.0 31.0 33.0 35.0 10 20 30 40 Average Price ($) Units Sold Academy of Marketing Studies Journal, Volume 17, Number 1, 2013 Table 1: AR(1) model fit for selected SKU’s Product Family SKU Price coeff (b) Std. 
Error (b) Auto-regressive coeff (c) Std. 
Error (c) A 0001 -0.88 1.01 -0.64 0.19 A 0002 -0.74 0.53 -0.11 0.21 A 0003 0.33 1.17 -0.29 0.22 A 0004 -0.03 0.37 -0.12 0.39 B 0005 0.43 0.31 -0.49 0.21 B 0006 -0.09 0.21 -0.16 0.22 B 0007 0.03 0.07 -0.31 0.21 B 0008 -0.31 0.24 -0.19 0.23 B 0009 1.16 1.32 -0.08 0.22 B 0010 -0.46 0.43 -0.24 0.21 We found that price sensitivity (parameter b) was not statistically different than zero (at a 0.05 significance level) for the products selected. 
This analysis was repeated at three different retail outlets with similar findings (data not presented). 
These findings supported the conclusion that in the range of prices in the transaction data, price-demand relationship is difficult to establish (and that demand changes appear to be independent of price changes). 
This fits the perceived managerial analysis since customer demand is expected to be reasonably price insensitive for these items. 
Products in these categories are expected to be price insensitive since demand is derived from repair or fabrication needs, and customers generally do not purchase anticipatory inventory. 
This conclusion of price insensitivity should be interpreted cautiously. 
First, we would expect to see demand drop when price reaches some threshold level due to both competitive reasons and customer push-back. 
In addition, customer evaluation of price may be based on a basket of products rather than based on the individual product. 
We would expect to see this basket effect with a general price increase, which we will discuss below. 
Our second observation from this analysis is that autoregressive parameter (c) was rarely significant for the 12-month period analyzed. 
That is, past demand is not a significant predictor of future demand. 
Break Even Analysis and Recommended Overall Margin Change Although the above data analysis indicated to us that demand is relatively insensitive to price, we were not able to determine from the data an estimate of price limitations that could be reasonably determined across the network. 
However, to guide managerial decision-making, we introduce an analytical tool to determine break even effect of price changes. 
The concept of break even analysis (Nagle, Hogan, & Zale, 2011) in this context is quite simple and as follows: for a proposed price change, calculate volume effect that would leave the retailer with exactly the same profit, offsetting price effects and volume effects. 
Price effect is the profit increase expected with a price increase if volume is unchanged. 
The volume effect is the customer response in volume to a price change. 
For example, consider a product with 20% gross margin Academy of Marketing Studies Journal, Volume 17, Number 1, 2013 at current prices. 
A 5% price increase will yield more profit as long as the volume decrease is less that 20%, as depicted in table 2. Conversely, a 5% price decrease for the same product will increase profitability only when volume increases by more than 33%. 
This analytical tool can be used to frame the discussion with retail management to determine overall pricing direction. 
We consider likely customer volume response at the current margin level and determine an overall price change plan. 
Discussion with executive management guided by this analysis determined that an overall margin increase, denoted by delta (δ), would be appropriate in this context. 
Table 2: Break-even analysis Segment Margin Performance Since analytical estimates of price sensitivity are not available in the data, we propose a heuristic approach to price improvement. 
We decided upon the following two objectives for this heuristic: (i) it must be theoretically sound and (ii) it must be practical enough to be implemented across the local retailers by central IS services. 
First we describe the heuristic, and then we evaluate it against these two criteria. 
Figure 1 provides the steps we followed as part of this heuristic. 
The heuristic is based on historic (one-year) history of average GM% for each product family at the individual retail outlet, and described in figure 2 below. 
The heuristic is described in the steps below and can be implemented by the centralized IS services organization to provide price matrix recommendations. 
Step 1. Extract sales data by product family. 
The first step is to extract total sales and margin by product family for the individual retailer, and determine overall average GM% for the retailer. 
We determine the largest sales volume product family and set that item to sales index value of 1, and calculate the relative sales index for product families as a percentage of the Price Change 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 35% -78% -64% -54% -47% -41% -37% -33% -30% -28% 25% -71% -56% -45% -38% -33% -29% -26% -24% -22% 15% -60% -43% -33% -27% -23% -20% -18% -16% -14% 5% -33% -20% -14% -11% -9% -8% -7% -6% -5% -5% 100% 33% 20% 14% 11% 9% 8% 7% 6% -15% 300% 100% 60% 43% 33% 27% 23% 20% -25% 500% 167% 100% 71% 56% 45% 38% -35% 700% 233% 140% 100% 78% 64% Gross Margin Academy of Marketing Studies Journal, Volume 17, Number 1, 2013 largest sales volume family. 
An indexing approach is suggested to form comparable analyses across retailers of different scale. 
Figure 1. The proposed heuristic for price performance improvement. 
Extract Sales Data by Product Family Identify Performance Regions Calculate New Margin for Each Family Analyze Margin Changes Local Management Input Implement and Monitor Step 2. Identify performance regions. 
We can then graph average GM% versus sales index as graphed below. 
Each point on the graph represents a single product family. 
The graph is divided into seven performance regions for margin change suggestions. 
Each region is described below. 
Region A: Items with sales index less than or equal to 0.1 and margin less than overall retailer average. 
These are candidates for the greatest margin increase. 
Since volumes are relatively low these items are less likely to be highly visible to customers. 
In addition, competitive pressures on these items are likely to be lower if cost levels at competitors are similar since there is less expected benefit to customers to “shop” these items. 
In addition, break even analysis suggests that a product with current margin at 10% can break even with a 15% price increase as long as volume decrease is less than 60%. 
For these reasons, we believe there is justification for an aggressive price increase in this region. 
Product families in region A have their GM% increased to the average GM% in region E plus the overall increase. 
         (2) Academy of Marketing Studies Journal, Volume 17, Number 1, 2013 Region B. Items with sales index greater than 0.1 and less than or equal to 0.2 and GM below overage GM%. 
We are somewhat less aggressive with price increases in this region. 
These product families are higher in volume and potentially more visible both from strategic and customer viewpoints. 
We increase below average items to overall local retailer overall average GM plus the general margin increase identified above. 
        (3) Region C. Items with sales index greater than or equal to 0.2 and less than 0.5 and below overall average GM%. 
We are less aggressive with price changes in this region. 
Volumes are higher and items are correspondingly more visible. 
We also see less scatter in the data than we see in region A which suggests a bit more price sensitivity. 
We use the logic here of splitting the difference between overall average and current margin, plus a factor that represents a general price increase. 
      0.5         (4) Region D. Items with sales index greater than 0.5. 
These are likely to be the most visible items in the portfolio and are therefore changed the least. Our micro analysis suggests that there is little price elasticity in a sample of these items, yet risk averse in this region is managerially prudent. 
Local retail managers are likely to be most knowledgeable of price limits in this region given the high visibility, thus these families are more likely to be efficiently priced. 
       (5) Region E. Items with sales index less than or equal to 0.1, and greater than overall average margin. 
These are the highly profitable yet low volume product families. 
These product families are the most likely to benefit from price increase for parallel reasons to those discussed in region A, yet overall margins are already fairly high in this region. 
The overall average GM% for region E are calculated and recommended margins that are below this level are increased to this overall average plus the general price level increase delta. 
(6)        for product families below     + δ Academy of Marketing Studies Journal, Volume 17, Number 1, 2013 Figure 2. Application of our proposed heuristic for an example retailer. 
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 0.00 0.10 0.20 0.30 0.40 0.50 0.60 0.70 0.80 0.90 1.00 Avg GM% Sales Index 21.25% BC E A D Analyze Margin Changes The heuristic above creates new suggested margin values for each product family and customer type combination. 
These values are loaded into a temporary pricing matrix for analysis. 
Sales and profit levels are simulated at various price elasticities as shown in figure 3 below. 
The same amount of price elasticity is applied to each SKU, from which volume and profitability impacts are calculated. 
For example if demand is perfectly inelastic, volume will remain unchanged and profit will increase 4.5% in our stylized example. 
Our example suggests that as long as overall price elasticity is less than 6, our pricing heuristic will increase profitability for the retailer. 
Academy of Marketing Studies Journal, Volume 17, Number 1, 2013 Figure 3: Theoretical relationship between %-increase in profit and elasticity. 
Evaluation of Heuristic Our first criterion to evaluate the heuristic is that it should be sound based on microeconomic principals. 
First, the most aggressive margin increases are associated with products that are currently sold at low margins. 
If cost levels are roughly comparable for the same items, it is less likely that competitors are selling these products for substantially lower prices. 
Thus for competitive reasons low margin products in this environment can likely withstand price increases. 
Second, the most aggressive margin increases are associated with low relative sales volume items. 
These items are likely to be less visible to customers as signals of overall price performance for the specific location, and thus likely to be more acceptable from a customer perspective. 
Because of lower volumes the relative benefits to customers to incur search cost for better price are less, supporting our contention that these customers will be less price sensitive for these items. 
Third, our heuristic uses the break-even price change logic. 
Lower margin products are more highly leveraged as can be seen in table 2. For example a product currently selling at a 10% margin, a 5% price increase will be profitable as long as volume is reduced by less than 33%. 
On the other hand for a product with a current 50% margin, a 5% price increase is only profitable if volume is reduced by less than 9%. Therefore our heuristic focuses price increases for product categories that are least susceptible to loss if price sensitivity levels are reached. 
Our second criterion for this heuristic is that it is implementable. 
We believe that this heuristic can scale (implemented across the network) for several reasons. 
First, the heuristic is simple. 
It can be relatively easily explained to retail managers. 
Model acceptance is a precondition for a complete roll out. 
Second, the heuristic is based on POS data. 
We don’t need external data or complex equations to develop recommendations. 
The IT staff should be able to -3% -2% -1% 0% 1% 2% 3% 4% 5% 00.51248 % Increase in Profit Elasticity Academy of Marketing Studies Journal, Volume 17, Number 1, 2013 implement at a reasonable time investment. 
This is an important step towards making pricing an internal core competency for the central IS services department (Dutta, Zbaracki, & Bergen, 2003). 
Third, we suggest an override feature to leverage idiosyncratic knowledge and serve a “sanity check” on our recommendations. 
This will increase buy-in by retail managers as they are given final involvement with implementing recommendations. 
This heuristic can be evaluated in practice by implementing the program on a pilot basis. 
We suggest identifying target retailers in different geographic regions to act as a treatment sample, and equivalent retailers from the same region to act as the control sample. 
Top and bottom line performance for these pilot cases can be evaluated statistically for change based on historical mean and standard deviations of performance at these locations using an ANOVA model. 
Using the matched-pair approach allows the separation of pricing effects from changes in economic conditions that may be taking place in each region and allow for a valid analysis of the heuristic on retailer performance. 
CONCLUSIONS We believe our price improvement heuristic can be generalized to any industry segment that either has products or product-families for whom demand is relatively price insensitive or have not yet increased the price to a level from where on the demand is elastic. 
Industry segments, such as wholesale distribution, where customers do not tend to buy in bulk when prices are low and vice versa, may see demand insensitivity to price. 
Products such as plumbing, HVAC, specialized medications (e.g., antibiotics), certain consumables on which consumers spend a small fraction of their monthly income or there are no close substitutes (e.g., eggs, milk, bread, salt, and cigarette) may be suited for our heuristic. 
There are several limitations to our heuristic that should be considered in evaluating its fitness for use in a given circumstance. 
First, we assume a constant general price adjustment, parameter delta in our model. 
We chose a single parameter for managerial simplicity given the large number of SKU’s and locations under consideration. 
Yet additional performance may be available with a separate adjustment in each “region” of our heuristic. 
Second, the sample of retailers chosen for development of the heuristic may not be representative of the network as a whole. 
We chose our sample to be representative of the range of performance in the network, consistent with suggestions of Yin (1999), yet there is possibly variation in the network not accounted for in the sampling plan that was available within our research budget. 
Future research in this area is two-fold. 
First, the heuristic that we proposed will be finetuned based on the results from the pilot implementations and eventually over the year of practical application evaluated for effectiveness. 
Mechanisms to track lost sales due to price increases must be set up to accurately capture the demand reductions (if any) due to price increases. 
We expect that the price changes recommended by our heuristic over the course of the next few months will help us identify the tipping point from where elasticity is significant and Academy of Marketing Studies Journal, Volume 17, Number 1, 2013 negative. 
From that point on, traditional price optimization methods may become effective. 
Second, it is likely that a few months of pilot study data may provide us with enough information to develop a variety of demand distributions and simulate the effect of price changes on company profitability. 
This way, the company management may avoid several months of expensive pilot and tracking, yet developing enough insights to fine-tune the parameters in the heuristic. 
REFERENCES Blattberg, R. C., & Fox, E. J. (1995). 
Category management: A series of implementation guides. 
Washington, DC: Food Marketing Institute. 
Boyaci, T., & Gallego, G. (2002). 
Coordinating pricing and inventory replinishment policies for one wholesaler and one or more geographically dispersed retailers. 
International Journal of Production Economics, 77(2), 95. Chen, F., & Federgruen, A. (2001). 
Near-optimal pricing and replenishment strategies for a retail/distribution system. 
Operations Research, 49(6), 839-853. 
Chen, H., Wu, O. Q., & Yao, D. D. (2010). 
On the benefit of inventory-based dynamic pricing strategies. 
Production & Operations Management, 19(3), 249-260. 
Davenport, T. H. (2006). 
Competing on analytics. 
Harvard Business Review, 84(1). 
Dutta, S., Zbaracki, M. J., & Bergen, M. (2003). 
Pricing process as a capability: A resource-based perspective. 
Strategic Management Journal, 24(7), 615. 
Elmaghraby, W., & Keskinocak, P. (2003). 
Dynamic pricing in the presence of inventory considerations: Research overview, current practices, and future directions. 
Management Science, 49(10), 1287-1309. 
Gooner, R. A. (2001). 
Managing product categories. 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill. 
Gooner, R. A., Morgan, N. A., & Perreault, W. D. (2011). 
Is retail category management worth the effort (and does a category captain help or hinder)? 
Journal of Marketing, 75(5), 18-33. 
Hamister, J. W., & Suresh, N. C. (2008). 
The impact of pricing policy on sales variability in a supermarket retail context. 
International Journal of Production Economics, 111(2), 441-455. 
Hoch, S. J., Dreze, X., & Purk, M. E. (1994). 
Edlp, hi-lo, and margin arithmetic. 
Journal of Marketing, 58(4), 16. Howell, D. (2005). 
Supermarkets take new tack in battle against edlp. 
DSN Retailing Today, 44(10), 7. Jia-Hau, G., Mao-Wei, H., & Leh-Chyan, S. (2009). 
A generalization of the barone-adesi and whaley approach for the analytic approximation of american options. 
Journal of Futures Markets, 29(5), 478-493. 
Lee, H. L., Padmanabhan, V., & Whang, S. (1997). 
Information distortion in a supply chain: The bullwhip effect. 
Management Science, 43(4), 546-558. 
Mazzoni, T. (2010). 
Fast analytic option valuation with garch. 
Journal of Derivatives, 18(1), 18-38. 
Miller, S. M., & Platen, E. (2008). 
Analytic pricing of contingent claims under the real-world measure. 
International Journal of Theoretical & Applied Finance, 11(8), 841-867. 
Nagle, T. T., Hogan, J. E., & Zale, J. (2011). 
The strategy and tactics of pricing : A guide to growing more profitably (5th Ed. ed.). 
Boston: Prentice Hall. 
Petruzzi, N. C., & Dada, M. (1999). 
Pricing and the newsvendor problem: A review with extensions. 
Operations Research, 47(2), 183-194. 
Sherali, H. D., Desai, J., & Glickman, T. S. (2008). 
Optimal allocation of risk-reduction resources in event trees. 
Management Science, 54(7), 1313-1321. 
Shipley, D., & Jobber, D. (2001). 
Integrative pricing via the pricing wheel. 
Industrial Marketing Management, 30(3), 301-314. 
Troy, M. (1997). 
'sales' could undercut wal-mart's edlp image. 
Discount Store News, 36(21), 14. Troy, M. (2002). 
Kmart: 2. Drop edlp--continue promoting the value message. 
DSN Retailing Today, 41(5), 33. Yeoman, I. (2009). 
Competing on analytics: The new science of winning. 
Journal of Revenue & Pricing Management, 8(5), 474-475. 
Yin, R. K. (1999). 
Enhancing the quality of case studies in health services research. 
Health Services Research, 34(5), 1209-1224. 
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. 
Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 