Academy of Strategic Management Journal, Volume 12, Number 1, 2013 
Academy of Strategic Management Journal, Volume 12, Number 1, 2013 benefits to the larger society, and competitive advantage of the firm, which opens the door for a special role of MNCs’ IHR functions in formulation, communication, training, integrating, monitoring, enforcement, and continuous improvement of an organization’s CSR vision, moral standards and strategic commitment. 
IHR will thereby become well positioned as a potential unifier to coordinate these CSR efforts internally and externally. 
Suggestions for future research are discussed and practical implications of the CSR construct and strategic options are provided. 
Keywords: Corporate social responsibility components, strategic options, international human resource management, emerging economies, high-tech MNCs, culture, regulatory environment INTRODUCTION In the era of globalization, business and society have become increasingly interwoven. 
As many firms continue to expand their businesses across borders, scholars and managers have devoted greater attention to cross-cultural business ethics and the strategic implications of corporate social responsibility (CSR). 
International business mandates that companies manage their worldwide operations efficiently and effectively on the basis of openness, corporate integrity, moral obligation to the larger society, and accountability. 
A rich literature on business ethics and CSR has emerged in the form of institutional theory, stakeholder theory, political behavior theory, cultural relativism, ethical universalism, moral obligations, utilitarianism, and efficiency perspectives. 
A prominent idea is the notion of sustainability arguing that organizations can do well by doing good and secure long-term economic performance by avoiding short-term behaviors that are socially detrimental or environmentally wasteful. 
The focus on integrating CSR into competitive sustainability in a specific sector, however, with companies as the unit of analysis, has been minimal (Rana, Platts & Gregory, 2009). 
Critics argue that CSR efforts are oftentimes counterproductive for two reasons (Porter & Kramer, 2006). 
First, they pit business against society, when in reality the two are interdependent. 
Second, they pressure companies to think of corporate social responsibility in generic ways instead of in the way most appropriate to their individual strategies. 
The prevailing approaches to CSR are so disconnected from corporate strategy as to obscure many great opportunities for companies to benefit society. 
Porter and Kramer (2002) draw attention to the decline of corporate philanthropy to the extent that corporate giving by U.S. companies as a percentage of profits dropped by 50% in 15 years. 
The current economic downturn has further impelled some to put CSR ideas on the backburner (Strandberg, 2009). 
Meanwhile, the pressure on businesses to play a role in social issues is growing in the wake of corporate scandal and scams involving MNCs and financial institutions like the fall of Enron, WorldCom and Lehman Brothers, PB oil spill, and numerous foreclosures as a group effect of real estate agencies, bankers and financial institutions such as Academy of Strategic Management Journal, Volume 12, Number 1, 2013 Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, AIG, GMAC (Citigroup), BAC (Bank of America), WFC (Wells Fargo), JPM (JPMorgan), etc. 
Critics increasingly expect corporations to behave more socially responsible and adhere to moral standards beyond minimal compliance, whereas many executives feel relentlessly pressured to maximize short-term profits in economic hard times. 
MNCs that have outsourced or shifted their operations from developed to developing or emerging economies to gain a costefficiency advantage over production factors and supply chains are often caught in the spotlight for perpetuating sweatshop working conditions, child labor practice, environmental pollution, and lack of welfare programs for workers and their families. 
Many ethical and CSR issues have a direct link to the human side of business. 
Although companies increasingly feel compelled to engage in CSR, most have not figured out how to do it well. 
CSR is approached more as a form of public relations or promoting a company’s image and brand, with an emphasis “on publicity rather than social impact” or “truly strategic philanthropy” (Porter & Kramer, 2002: 6). Consequently there are genuine doubts about whether such approaches actually work or just breed public cynicism about company motives. 
Some scholars observe that certain CSR programs lack altruism and serve as a sign of submission to institutional pressures (Bies, Bartunek, Fort & Zald, 2007). 
CSR, however, includes a broad spectrum of actions and strategies that can open infinite opportunities that benefit both business and society. 
The present study builds linkages between cross-cultural ethical issues and potential CSR strategic options in a company’s specific competitive environment to achieve a proper balance between a firm’s global strategy and its local responsiveness in the context of international human resource management (IHR). 
We propose that strategic human resource management across borders plays a key role in helping the firm identify, prioritize and achieve CSR goals, thereby improving firm-industry specific social and environmental conditions locally and globally. 
Effective IHR leadership of CSR integration into global business strategy and local responsiveness requires organizational commitment and support from the headquarters, Board, CEO and executives, and therefore, business ethics and CSR values will be fostered and embedded in “the way we do business around here”. 
THE CONSTRUCT OF CSR AND STRATEGIC OPTIONS Both scholars and business practitioners recognize the difficulties in globalizing the existing CSR concepts (e.g., McWilliams, Siegel & Wright, 2006). 
It is particularly challenging to align CSR with a firm’s global strategy; however, addressing economic and social goals simultaneously benefits both the firm and society because the firm brings unique assets and expertise to improve the competitive context of the business environment including the quality of life in the local community. 
Consistent with the Society for Human Resource Management (SHRM, 2007: vii), we define CSR as “the commitment by organizations to balance financial Academy of Strategic Management Journal, Volume 12, Number 1, 2013 performance with contributions to the quality of life of their employees, the local community and society at large”. 
The Construct of CSR One concern regarding CSR research is the lack of clarity with respect to the definition and dimensionality of the construct (Rowley & Berman, 2000; McWilliams et al., 2006). 
Carroll (1979) identified four components of CSR: economic, legal, ethical, and discretionary or philanthropic. 
The point was that “CSR, to be accepted as legitimate, had to address the entire spectrum of obligations business has to society, including the most fundamental – economic” (Carroll, 1991: 40). 
The economic component is business’s fundamental responsibility to make a profit and grow, which parallels the shareholder perspective (Friedman, 1970), and also includes providing economic benefits to other stakeholders such as fair paying jobs for employees and good quality, fair priced products for consumers. 
The legal component refers to firms’ duty to obey the law and to play by the rules of the game that at least meet minimal legal requirement. 
The ethical component addresses firms’ responsibility to respect the rights of others and to meet the obligations placed on them by society to secure these rights. 
This component is consistent with the idea of corporate citizenship and stakeholder theory (e.g., Freeman, 1984; Donaldson & Preston, 1995; Dawkins & Lewis, 2003) and requires corporate integrity and ethical behavior beyond mere compliance with laws and regulations. 
The discretion component involves philanthropic activities that firms perform in a manner consistent with charitable expectations of society and that help enhance a community’s quality of life, such as to assist the fine and performing arts, private and public educational institutions, and humanitarian programs. 
The discretionary component is rooted in the belief that firms have a wide scope of discretionary judgment and choice in terms of deciding on specific activities or philanthropic contributions that are aimed at giving back to society. 
The four-component conceptualization of CSR is constructed as a pyramid towards an improved ethical organizational climate: be profitable, obey the law, be ethical, and be a good corporate citizen (Carroll, 1991; 1999). 
Some scholars contend that there is no absolute hierarchy of duties (e.g., Ross, 2000; Lantos, 2002; Waldman, de Luque, Washburn & House, 2006), and instead suggest that the ranking of CSR components depends on the situation. 
For example, from the stakeholder perspective, the pyramid of CSR would envision stakeholders as existing at four levels, from broad and less immediate to the firm to narrow with close ties to the firm. 
In the case of corporate giving, for example, making a monetary donation to a charity organization could be a philanthropic action at the expense of interests of others closer to the firm, such as workers, who might then receive lower pay, or consumers who might then pay higher prices. 
In this situation, the four-component pyramid offers little strategic guidance for organizations facing a dilemma. 
Lantos (2001) distinguished between ethical and altruistic CSR as mandatory (ethical) vs. voluntary (social). 
Ethical CSR is morally mandatory and goes beyond fulfilling a firm’s Academy of Strategic Management Journal, Volume 12, Number 1, 2013 economic and legal obligations to its ethical responsibilities to avoid harms or social injuries, even if the firm might not appear to benefit from this. 
Actions are taken because they are right, not because they are mandated by law or are profitable, such as money spent on workplace safety or pollution control. 
Here, ethical CSR incorporates the first three components in the CSR pyramid (Carroll, 1991) discussed above. 
In contrast, altruistic CSR is voluntary, equivalent to philanthropic responsibilities, and involves contributions to the greater good of various stakeholders, regardless whether or not this will benefit the business itself. 
Firms practicing altruistic CSR help to alleviate various social ills within a community or society, such as poverty, illiteracy, child labor, drug and alcohol problems, among others. 
The justification of corporate altruism lies in the fact that modern corporations have been entrusted with massive economic and human resources and therefore have an implicit social contract between business and society whereby firms agree to be good stewards of society’s resources. 
However, Lantos (2001) contends that altruistic CSR, although noble and virtuous, could conflict with the profit-making orientation of business firms, and hence may lie outside the proper scope of their activities. 
Enderle (2004) suggests that firms have three responsibilities to society: economic, social, and environmental. A research paradigm parallel with this perspective is stakeholder theory, whereby firms are deemed responsible to specific stakeholder groupings, such as stockholders, consumers, employees, suppliers, local communities, larger society, environment, and so on. The principle of sustainability often invokes the so-called triple bottom line of a firm’s economic, social, and environmental performance (Porter & Kramer, 2006). 
When framed in terms of managerial decision-making values, CSR appears to be a multidimensional construct, composed of concern for shareholder/owners, stakeholders, and the community/state welfare (Waldman et al., 2006). 
The CSR components depicted in a pyramid, as a dichotomous categorization, or as a three-dimensional model offer insight into what constitute corporate responsibilities, but they fall short of strategic guidance that would enable firms to align their CSR goals with business opportunities (Galbreath, 2006). 
The fragmentation between the generic CSR rationale and specific companies or the locations where they operate does not help enhance the capability of the focal companies to make any meaningful social impact, nor would it strengthen their longterm competiveness (Porter & Kramer, 2006). 
Since stakeholders have different demands and priorities, which are sometimes conflicting or mutually exclusive, their responses to specific CSR approaches range from positive to negative and neutral to skeptical. Nevertheless, CSR continues to attract stakeholder interest. Porter and Kramer (2002) conclude that integrating CSR in corporate and business strategies will be critical in global competition. 
For the present study we propose that in the cross-cultural context, different cultural values (e.g., time-orientation, collectivism vs. individualism) are likely to influence the ranking of CSR components, stakeholder expectations, and how business executives prioritize and pursue CSR goals. 
In view of corporate philanthropic activities, local communities may be confronted with different socioeconomic challenges like tropical diseases, HIV/AIDS epidemics, overuse of Academy of Strategic Management Journal, Volume 12, Number 1, 2013 natural resources, pollution, high unemployment rates, illiteracy, sweatshops, poverty, or social disparity issues. 
Without a firm-industry specific competitive context, these problems may appear equally important and hard to prioritize, whereas to different local communities where MNCs operate and compete, they may not be equally challenging or equally urgent. 
National wealth, organizational resources and capabilities, and personal values of individual executives may also influence where to focus and how CSR decisions are being made. 
Bridging CSR Arguments with Strategic Options Strategic CSR is largely underdeveloped in the literature (Galbreath, 2006). 
Hill, Ireland and Hoskisson (2001) define a strategy as an integrated and coordinated set of commitments and actions designed to exploit core competences and gain a competitive advantage. 
Existing conceptualizations of strategic management suggest there are two levels of strategy making: corporate strategy and business unit strategy. 
Corporate strategy is concerned with the scope of the firm in terms of the industries and markets in which it operates and competes, while business unit strategy is concerned with how the firm operates and competes within a particular industry or specific individual product markets. 
For the purpose of the present research, we follow the perspective of strategic CSR in the cross-cultural context (Galbreath, 2006) that corporate strategy is equated to the home country while business unit strategy is equated to the host country. 
This perspective is consistent with the definition of global strategy in which standardized products are offered across borders (in a CSR strategy, e.g., standard business ethics are followed) and the competitive strategy (e.g., CSR vision and commitment as a differentiation strategy) is dictated by the home office. 
CSR host-country responsiveness is aligned with the purpose of business unit strategy or multi-domestic strategy in which strategic and operating decisions are decentralized in order to tailor products to local markets and, likewise, CSR programs and initiatives can be tailored to the host-country environment and be responsive to specific stakeholder groupings in the local community or society at large. 
Lantos (2002) defines strategic CSR as involving corporate community service activities that accomplish strategic business goals. 
Here, corporate philanthropy is aimed at achieving strategic business goals while also promoting social welfare. 
Corporations contribute to the community not only because it is a kind and generous thing to do, but also because they believe it to be in their best financial interests to do so, thereby fulfilling corporate fiduciary responsibilities to the stockholders. 
Proponents for CSR have used four arguments: moral obligation, sustainability, license to operate, and reputation (Porter and Kramer, 2006). 
Unfortunately CSR has had limited impact on the field of strategic management (Galbreath, 2006). 
The segregation between economic and social perspectives of CSR often put the two in conflict. 
Business executives find it hard, if not impossible, to justify charitable expenditures in terms of bottom-line profits (Porter & Kramer, 2002). 
The current economic downturn has provoked some organizations to put CSR activities on hold until the economy rebounds, while Academy of Strategic Management Journal, Volume 12, Number 1, 2013 others think that those who abandon CSR will lose ground and breed cynicism in brighter times (Strandberg, 2009). 
Given the uncertainty surrounding CSR, it is time to address two basic questions: Is CSR a generic rationale that fits all or is there a framework of strategic options for individual firms to assess, compose and implement according to their firm-industry specific competitive conditions? 
Galbreath (2007) recommends four CSR strategic options, including the shareholder strategy, the altruistic strategy, the reciprocal strategy, and the citizenship strategy. 
In the following we navigate CSR strategic options in the cross-cultural context, with special attention to high-tech MNCs and the unique role of IHR in assessing, formulating and implementing CSR strategies in emerging economies. 
Our classification of a high-tech firm includes both R&D intensity and usage of most advanced technology in a given industry. 
Because high-tech firms develop or use the most advanced technology, they are often viewed as having a great potential for high profits and growth as well as possessing exceptional resources and capabilities to generate greater value for society. 
A high-tech MNC might work on a project 24 hours a day, with professional teams and operative employees working across the headquarters and foreign subsidiaries, with value-chain management around the globe, and with suppliers and strategic partners in different parts of the world. 
We propose that CSR strategic options for a high-tech MNC are not an either or selection from a broad spectrum but should embrace both parentcountry and host-country considerations. 
Shareholder Strategy The shareholder strategy is best aligned with the efficiency perspective and the legal component of CSR, which is exclusively focused on maximizing shareholder returns. 
It is argued (Friedman, 1970) that the only responsibility of business is to provide jobs, make goods and services that are demanded by consumers, pay taxes, make a profit by obeying minimum legal requirements for operation and by engaging in open and free competition without deception or fraud. 
This argument entails the belief in the “invisible hand” that free market forces will self adjust to correct social problems, which business managers are not trained for, but taxes paid to the local and state governments can be directed to community/state welfares or social issues. 
A corporation’s only social responsibility is its fiduciary duty to maximize shareholder wealth while obeying the law and basic concerns of ethics (Friedman, 1996). 
Consequently the use of organizational resources for the larger good, such as donating to charities, is detrimental to firms since it may decrease profitability or increase product prices or both (Pinkston & Carroll, 1996). 
Initiatives focused on CSR may be possible, but only if they improve the profits of the firm. 
By pursuing maximum profit and strict accountability to the owners of capital, the wealth created is sufficient to meet any social responsibility (Friedman, 1970). 
Given its pure economic focus, the shareholder strategy is a strategic CSR option with a predominantly short-term vision in that it is Academy of Strategic Management Journal, Volume 12, Number 1, 2013 primarily concerned with producing better financial results over any given previous period (Galbreath, 2007). 
We propose that despite the on-going debates surrounding the pure shareholder focus, the shareholder strategy is nevertheless a valid CSR strategic option since it requires firms to conduct business in compliance with the law and play by the rules of the game in an open, ethical manner without deception or fraud – avoid harm or social injuries (ethical and mandatory). 
Law reflects society’s codification of right and wrong, while the rules of the game can be tangible or intangible in the firm-industry specific competitive context (e.g., from well established standards in a given industry to the widely shared social expectations in one’s home country, host county, or the global marketplace). 
For example, many U.S. based MNCs recognize the importance of effectively and equitably managing their workforce diversity both in compliance with the law such as EEOA (Equal Employment Opportunity Act) related legislation and as a guiding principle for better serving an increasingly diverse customer base domestically and globally. 
We propose that from a cross-cultural perspective profitability stands most practically as a universal business value, at least among organizations in the private sectors, but the extent to which firms are willing to compromise short-term profit maximization for the larger good of society is likely to vary across borders and among firms of different nationalities. 
As an example, a longitudinal GLOBE study of cultural and leadership predictors of CSR in 15 countries (Waldman et al., 2006) indicates that at the societal level, higher per capita GDP (gross domestic product) is positively associated with managerial values focusing on shareholders. 
Specifically, managers in affluent and wealthier countries tend to be more in tune with CSR issues pertaining to shareholders and owners, and are clearly less inclined to think about the welfare of the greater community or society in their decision making. 
Perhaps they focus their attention “closer to home” in terms of shareholders or owners, while leaving greater community or societal concerns to the government or other institutions. 
In contrast, managers in poorer nations are apt to feel a personal responsibility toward the community and society at large, probably due to the inadequate government capability or other institutional agencies to deal with these concerns. 
Findings from the same study suggest that countries scoring higher on institutional collectivism values tend to encourage delaying immediate needs or gratification for future concerns and priorities. 
It is likely that collectivistic social norms promote thinking about how managerial actions pertain to the concerns of the larger collective or society. 
In this regard both cultural values and institutional conditions emerge to shape the managerial CSR values and priorities, thereby jointly influencing their strategic CSR decisionmaking. 
It is likely that cultural values and the firm-industry specific legal, regulatory context also influence a firm’s predisposition toward relatively short-term or long-term returns to its shareholders. 
Academy of Strategic Management Journal, Volume 12, Number 1, 2013 Altruistic Strategy The altruistic strategy parallels the concept of corporate philanthropy that goes beyond preventing possible harms (ethical, mandatory) to helping alleviate public welfare deficiencies (social, voluntary), regardless of whether or not this will benefit the business itself (Lantos, 2002). 
Typically philanthropic giving comes from a firm’s surplus profits and is distributed according to social values and social and moral precepts, thereby contributions may be channeled to various kinds of social, educational, recreational, or cultural constituencies. 
Personal values of executives and even their religious convictions may influence how a firm is predisposed toward social responsibility beyond profit maximization (Joyner & Payne, 2002; Angelidis & Ibrahim, 2004; Hemingway & Maclagan, 2004; Waldman et al., 2006). 
The altruistic strategy encompasses “doing the right thing” by giving back to the community without expecting anything in return. 
As an act of goodwill on the part of the firm, direct benefits may not be measured. 
Corporate giving may be based on social causes on an ad hoc or intermittent basis such as after a natural disaster in the community, or in the form of reoccurring contributions such as annual charity giving (Galbreath, 2006). 
In comparison with the shareholder strategy, corporate altruism is clearly more value driven, cause-related, intermittent, or ad hoc. 
Drivers may include societal, organizational, and individual levels of values and beliefs (e.g., employee voluntary programs, employee community service, employer donation or match of contributions to various social, cultural, recreational, or environmental enterprises, etc.). 
A pilot study involving HR professionals in seven countries (SHRM, 2007: 25) offers empirical evidence of the corporate movement toward CSR altruistic values as reflected in their consistently positive responses to the statement “organizations should go beyond money making and contribute to broader societal goals”, a converging trend toward corporate philanthropy. 
However, the same study also highlights that firms in different societies vary greatly in their CSR approaches, indicating marked divergence in cross-cultural CSR practices and priorities. 
As shown in Table 1, the largest percentages of the HR respondents in India and China reported that their organizations had donated or collected money for natural disasters, such as the South-Asian tsunami, hurricane Katrina in the United States, earthquakes, etc. 
This CSR pattern in Asia’s major emerging economies appears more ad hoc and humanitarian-oriented through aids, rescue and disaster relief activities beyond the firms’ home base national boundaries. 
In contrast, the largest percentages of the HR respondents in the United States, Canada, Australia, Mexico and Brazil reported that their organizations had donated or collected money for local charities. 
This CSR pattern appears more intermittent, value- and social cause-related. 
Despite the clear differences, it is worth noting that the top two most frequently reported CSR practices are for local charities and natural disasters among firms from five out of even surveyed countries: the United States, Australia, China, India, and Mexico, regardless of culture and economic disparities. 
Academy of Strategic Management Journal, Volume 12, Number 1, 2013 Table 1: Selected CSR Practices by Country CSR Practices U.S. (n=420) Canada (n=1,106) Australia (n=266) China (n=108) India (n=161) Mexico (n =113) Brazil (n =149) Donate/collect money for local charities 88% 90% 84% 64% 60% 76% 74% Donate/collect money for natural disasters (e.g., South-Asian tsunami, hurricane Katrina, earthquakes, etc.) 77% 51% 68% 69% 70% 61% 30% Support the community through company-sponsored volunteer projects 66% 58% 51% 26% 57% 45% 73% Consider the overall social impact of business decisions 47% 54% 52% 35% 38% 26% 62% Partner with woman- or minorityowned suppliers/companies 39% 19% 12% - 22% 20% 25% Monitor the impact of business on the environment 34% 53% 50% 23% 39% 42% 65% Partner with environmentally friendly suppliers/companies 27% 38% 36`% 22% 39% 37% 70% Cause marketing/branding (i.e., aligning product or company marketing with a particular social cause) 25% 32% 32% 31% 31% 27% 48% Monitor global fair labor standards and practices (e.g., child labor regulations, working conditions) 15% 22% 17% 19% 39% 53% 73% Track sources of global raw materials/suppliers 7% 8% 9% 10% 13% 19% 32% Source: SHRM (2007) CSR Pilot Study. 
Data sorted in descending order by the U.S. data. 
The sample sizes and percentages are based on the actual number of respondents who provided information about participation in selected corporate social responsibility practices. 
Percentages do not total 100% due to multiple response options. 
The response option “partner with woman-or minority-owned suppliers/companies” was not available to respondents from China. 
Caution should be exercised when interpreting results with small sample sizes. 
Potential reasons for the large cross-cultural variation in CSR practices and priorities may include availability of financial resources, organizational size, cultural traditions, and public sensitivity toward economic, social and environmental issues. 
We propose through the present research that genuine altruism does not have to be separated from a firm’s business objectives but rather it may engender enlightened self-interest to the extent that the firm may gain enhanced workplace morale, sound public relations, and an outstanding reputation, among others, which together may enable the firm to outperform its competitors in the same industry. 
Corporate philanthropic initiatives can help improve the quality of life in the local community or larger society, which will ultimately benefit all citizens including the altruistic firms. 
This proposition embraces a long-term dimension of the altruistic strategy, in which no immediate self-interest or economic returns are sought. 
Reciprocal Strategy The reciprocal strategy is more pragmatic in that it seeks to resolve the conflicts between corporate economic objectives and intense social, moral, and environmental expectations of society (Galbreath, 2006). 
Recent corporate scandals suggest that a firm’s survival in modern society requires an awareness of social responsibility as an indispensable part of strategy. 
In this strategy, firms are more proactive with respect to CSR activities. 
CSR activities, including corporate giving, should be tied to one’s core business resources and capabilities. 
For example, Academy of Strategic Management Journal, Volume 12, Number 1, 2013 high-tech firms, such as Motorola, HP, Ericsson and Siemens, among others in China, have followed one another to provide continuous in-house employee training and development opportunities and have also established strategic partnerships with local Chinese universities to improve education in science and engineering. 
These CSR activities and investments not only benefit local communities or the society at large by promoting education in science and engineering but are also strategically aimed at growing human capital internally and developing a future talent pool externally for the high-tech MNCs themselves – mutually beneficial and systematically pursued. 
From the global strategy perspective, as emerging economies progress to become more like developed economies, their national competitive advantages, by design, will be also upgraded from low- to high-skilled labor. 
In the knowledge-based high-tech industry, human capital is a core intangible resource for innovation. 
By investing in people and through strategic partnerships with local schools, high-tech MNCs in emerging economies also improve quality of labor for themselves and for their local suppliers, which in turn help sustain the key competence of the high-tech firms whose survival and sustained competitiveness depend on innovation and continuous upgrading. 
Another good example is Microsoft that has a long established Working Connections partnership with the American Association of Community Colleges (AACC) and its continuous CSR involvement in various humanitarian and educational projects in developing countries and emerging economies to help raise IT literacy and public awareness of social and environmental issues, which in turn help nurture potential future IT employees, customers, and long-term business opportunities and sustainability for the company. 
Consistent with the conceptualization of the reciprocal strategy and the firm-industry specific cases discussed above, SHRM (2007) found public image at the top of a series of organizational attributes that HR respondents surveyed in seven countries believe can be improved by CSR practices, followed by employee morale, consumer/customer confidence, brand recognition, employee loyalty, and position as an employer of choice as the leading CSR benefits to their organizations (Table 2). Empirical findings and firm-industry specific cases incorporated in the present research clearly show both tangible and intangible benefits of CSR practices to the investing or contributing firms. 
In the reciprocal strategy, activity-based reporting is helpful in that it allows a firm to track a given CSR investment to an actual return or specific benefits to the firm. 
Calculated CSR activities, self disclosure and reporting also make a firm’s CSR commitment and results more transparent to both its shareholders and stakeholders. 
In line with suggestions by Waldman et al (2006), we generally posit that from a crosscultural perspective the reciprocal strategy may be aligned more in tune with stakeholder social expectations in collectivism-oriented societies where firm-community relationships and mutual benefits tend to outweigh the pure shareholder/owner focus. 
Academy of Strategic Management Journal, Volume 12, Number 1, 2013 Table 2: Degrees That CSR Practices Improve Various Organizational Factors by Country CSR Impact U.S. (n=431) Canada (n=1,145) Australia (n=286) China (n=117) India (n=170) Mexico (n =114) Brazil (n =153) Public image 3.62 3.64 3.56 3.73 3.67 3.73 3.90 Employee morale 3.32 3.24 3.16 3.08 3.24 3.59 3.78 Consumer/customer confidence 3.31 3.26 3.10 3.35 3.22 3.52 3.68 Brand recognition 3.30 3.27 3.30 3.45 3.51 3.52 3.84 Employee loyalty 3.26 3.25 3.17 3.10 3.18 3.52 3.71 Position as an employer of choice 3.15 3.27 3.20 3.22 3.10 3.27 3.89 Competitive advantage 2.99 2.98 2.87 2.99 2.90 3.25 3.47 Recruitment of top employees 2.95 2.99 2.84 3.09 2.94 3.15 3.32 Employee retention 2.88 2.93 2.82 2.76 2.76 3.11 3.28 Financial bottom line 2.74 2.64 2.57 2.37 2.56 2.80 3.17 Workforce productivity 2.66 2.62 2.48 2.43 2.74 2.96 3.20 Source: Based on a pilot study reported by SHRM (2007). 
Data sorted in descending order by the U.S. data. 
The sample size is the total number of responding HR professionals by country; however, the averages are based on the actual number of respondents by country who answered these questions. 
Average ratings are based on a scale where 1 = “to no degree at all” and 4 = “to a large degree” (higher averages indicate greater degree of belief). 
Caution should be exercised when interpreting results with small sample sizes. 
Citizenship Strategy Corporate citizenship as a strategic option recognizes a broader scope of moral obligations to society and is best described as a stakeholder perspective. 
Stakeholder theory suggests how the diffusion and transfer of ethical principles and CSR values into business activities could affect stakeholder relations involving various internal and external constituents such as employees, consumers, suppliers, stockholders, local communities, larger society, the environment, and so on. Since stakeholders’ expectations and priorities differ and are often mutually exclusive (Sethi, 2003), balancing the competing demands of various groups is a feature of this strategy (Galbreath, 2006). 
For example, if a high-tech firm downsizes its home base of operation while shifting its production jobs overseas in order to maximize efficiency and profitability, is it good citizenship or socially irresponsible? 
In this paradox, stakeholders are likely to give different answers both within and across borders. 
A key attribute of the citizenship strategy is proactive and open dialogues with diverse stakeholders to the extent that the success of this strategy depends on transparency, accountability, and effective means to encourage and incorporate diverse stakeholders’ inputs and feedback about the firm’s triple bottom line performance. 
Stakeholders’ inputs and feedback, and firms’ strategic objectives and social responsiveness are integrated in the CSR vision and practices. 
Potential CSR benefits to the firm may not be materialized in a short time frame; however, the citizenship strategy is more proactive and long-term focused even if at the expense of weaker short-term results. 
The citizenship strategy encompasses managing and measuring CSR activities and outcomes (e.g., the triple bottom line of financial, social, and environmental performance, impacts, reports, and continuous improvement). 
Scholars in the field of strategic CSR suggest that corporate citizenship offers both tangible and intangible rewards from improved financial results, workplace morale, brand image and outstanding organizational reputation to better quality of the firm-industry specific Academy of Strategic Management Journal, Volume 12, Number 1, 2013 competitive context towards the future (e.g., Margolis & Walsh, 2003; McWilliams & Siegel, 2000; Porter & Kramer, 2002; Yang, Colvin & Wong, 2012). 
As an example, a field study by one of the coauthors of the present research found that when post-apartheid South Africa was confronted with chronic high unemployment, Volkswagen, the German automobile MNC chose to operate its foreign subsidiary in South Africa in a suboptimal way to save jobs for local assembly line workers and their families. 
In addition, Volkswagen sponsored entrepreneurial workshops for women in collaboration with the local church, and donated computers to the most ill-funded school district, which had no direct link to Volkswagen’s business but were particularly aimed at helping alleviate public problems associated with high unemployment rates in the local community. 
The Volkswagen Group website provides its CSR Worldwide vision and projects with the following statement: Helping others to help themselves. 
For us, as a good corporate citizen, social involvement constitutes a key element of our entrepreneurial activities. 
The same maxims apply at all Volkswagen Group locations worldwide: we support social development, culture and education. 
At its facilities the Group is involved in the development of regional infrastructure and research, setting up projects in the fields of health promotion, sport and nature conservation. 
Our responsibility does not end at the factory gates. 
We are committed to improving the living conditions of people at our locations beyond the minimum statutory requirements. 
The Volkswagen Group has a long tradition of looking after the interests of the regions in which our production facilities are located. 
As part of our corporate culture, this has also been a major factor in enabling us to recruit qualified personnel for our company. 
CSR activities and managerial decision-making in the case of Volkswagen in postapartheid South Africa appear closely aligned with the citizenship strategy. 
Even if there seems to be no immediate or direct benefits to the firm, as a far-sighted approach to the key issues of the future, corporate citizenship serves as an important factor to position the firm competitively in the global marketplace. 
In the era of increased public concern over global climate change and overuse of natural resources, Volkswagen was the first car manufacturer to apply ISO 14000 series (global standards for environmental management) during its drafting stage, which was proactive and tied to its cutting-edge technology and innovation capability through resource conservation, reducing greenhouse emissions and fuel consumption, enabling the use of alternative fuels, avoiding the use of hazardous materials, and inventing the environmental friendly manufacturing process that facilitates car disassembling and recycling systems. 
In 2011, Volkswagen was named among the top 25 of the Forbes Global 2000 Leading Companies. 
Since firms and society are interdependent, what is good for the local community or society at large will be ultimately beneficial to the firms. 
We propose that in the long run, social and economic goals are integrally connected. 
However, with a broad spectrum of CSR issues and strategic options, organizations need to rethink where to start and how to focus. 
Porter and Kramer (2002) suggest a context-focused approach that requires companies to use their unique Academy of Strategic Management Journal, Volume 12, Number 1, 2013 attributes to address social needs in the corporate competitive context, thus promoting a convergence of interests between business and society. 
THE ROLE OF HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT IN STRATEGIC CSR Since many of the cross-cultural ethical and social issues have a direct link to the human side of business, we propose that a firm’s IHR function plays a key role in helping its home office and foreign subsidiaries identify, prioritize, and achieve strategic CSR objectives locally and globally. 
We define IHR as managing human resources across borders, including conventional HR responsibility in strategic planning, staffing, employee training and development, performance management, compensation and benefits, and industrial relations in the international arena. 
Compared to HR practices in a domestic context, IHR is more complex because it concerns disparate socioeconomic environments and multicultural employee groups such as parent-country nationals, host-country nationals, and third-country nationals. 
Since managerial attitudes and organizational approaches toward business ethics and CSR issues are rooted in differing cultural traditions, social norms, economic conditions, regulatory institutions, and business practices, IHR stands as a potential integrative system to transfer well established moral standards from a MNC’s home base to its foreign subsidiaries and business partners. 
If systematically pursued, IHR can also play a key role in helping a MNC incorporate appropriate global standards, foster CSR values vertically and horizontally, and accommodate diverse stakeholder expectations within the paradigm of strategic international human resource management. 
Current and prospective employees compose a key stakeholder grouping close to the firm. 
From the shareholder perspective, safeguarding employees from harm at work is one of the basic concerns of business ethics. 
Whereas the legal and regulatory institutions tend to be inadequate and laws are often not enforced in many developing countries and emerging economies, MNCs from developed countries tend to have well established rules and ethical standards at home, such as the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), EEOA related legislation, and Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in the United States. 
There are also regional and global institutions that have set up certain universal rules and global CSR standards such as the ISO (International Organization for Standardization) 14000 series for the environment, ISO 26000 for social responsibility, and SA (Social Accountability) 8000 for labor related issues. 
In this regard, MNCs have a great potential to create greater good for society by transferring knowledge and leveraging appropriate CSR practices across borders. 
From the stakeholder perspective, IHR can help the firm identify and benchmark other companies’ successful CSR practices that matter most to the local community and are also aligned with the firm’s strategic objectives. 
Table 3 exemplifies the critical role of HR/IHR in a firm’s potential CSR strategic options. 
In the typology of CSR strategic options, there is Academy of Strategic Management Journal, Volume 12, Number 1, 2013 significant overlap in the role of HR/IHR as well as in terms of benefits to the firm and impact to society, because the strategic options are not exclusive. 
As Table 3 indicates, there is variation in the degree and orientation of CSR strategic options’ core values and focus. 
Table 3: CSR Strategic Options and the Role of HR/IHR CSR Strategic Options Core Values and Focus Role of HR/IHR Benefits and Social Impact Shareholder Strategy 긾ost-efficiency, profit maximization, short-term economic return on CSR investment Providing good jobs through job analysis and job redesign, fair pay, workplace safety, quality products and services in compliance of law and firm ethical codes of conduct Improved workplace morale, job satisfaction, productivity, labor relations, consumer confidence and loyalty, tax obligations to society Altruistic Strategy Giving back without expecting return, humanitarian or social cause-related, ad hoc or intermittent philanthropic practices Nurturing and embracing CSR values in organizational culture, support and provide employee voluntary community service opportunities, sponsorship or match of contributions to charities, disaster reliefs, or social, environmental projects Good will, ethical and CSR leadership, social impact and contributions to broader societal goals, help to alleviate public problems Reciprocal Strategy Mutual benefits, CSR tied to business goals and benefits, medium to longterm planning Employee training and development opportunities, partnership with local educational institutions, preventive healthcare and welfare programs, incorporating community services and contributions to larger society in performance review systems Human capital and future talent pool development, recruiting and retention, connection to better quality of life in local communities Citizenship Strategy Moral obligations to other citizens in society, business-society interdependence, sustainability, long-term horizon Demonstrating transparency and accountability on the part of the firm, CSR auditing and reporting as the process of communicating with diverse stakeholder groups, web-based CSR value statement, self disclosure and CSR activities as related to domestic, foreign, and global communities, incorporating diverse stakeholders’ inputs and feedback in CSR strategy development and implementation Outstanding reputation, triple bottom line performance, improved social and environmental conditions for sustainability and greater good of society, holistic competitive context improvement for the future Fair labor practices and continuous employee training and development not only improve the quality of workers, but also improve their job satisfaction, retention, and workplace morale, so that the company may enable itself to compete more vigorously in the global marketplace, and workers and their families have a better quality of life. 
Volkswagen, for example, states specifically how its success is based on the qualification and personal commitment of approximately 400,000 employees around the world. 
A company will only be able to survive in the face of international competition if it has a top team, characterized by a high level of competence, dedication, inventiveness and fitness. 
Competence is created from good basic training and a life-long willingness to learn. 
Dedication ideally means entrepreneurial thinking and actions, not only by management staff. 
Active contribution of ideas and participation are expected of all members of staff. 
Academy of Strategic Management Journal, Volume 12, Number 1, 2013 The success factors are encouraged in our human resources processes and in projects. 
According to the SHRM (2007) study, a vast majority of the HR respondents in the United States (91%), Australia (89%), India (85%), China (81%), Canada (91%), Mexico (89%) and Brazil (95%) indicate their organizational participation in CSR practices. 
CSR practices are believed to improve a series of organizational factors with a large part directly linked to the areas of responsibility conventionally handled by the HR function, such as employee morale, employee loyalty, positioning as an employer of choice, recruitment of top employees, employee retention, and workplace productivity. 
However, HR professionals are more likely to be primarily responsible for implementing their organizational CSR strategies than being directly involved in strategy development. 
Among a list of main obstacles to CSR programs, cost, unproven benefits, and lack of support from senior managers are identified as the top three for the American HR respondents, whereas for the HR respondents in China and India, the third on the rank of main obstacles is “it is not yet mainstream, so there is no business advantage” (SHRM, 2007: 24). 
This difference opens the door for MNCs to transfer their CSR knowledge and competence across borders by demonstrating CSR visions and practices in emerging economies, and through the role of their IHR to help elevate public awareness of the competitive advantage and synergy that CSR can create and sustain locally and globally. 
This of course cannot be accomplished without well established CSR values at the multinationals’ headquarters and corporate global strategy that embrace CSR visions, objectives, and commitment. 
As organizations worldwide have begun to embrace CSR both as a social responsibility and for sustaining their competitive advantage, HR/IHR functions have a number of possibilities to play a larger role in CSR strategy from conception to application. 
Strandberg (2009) lays out ten steps that HR professionals can follow to support the integration of CSR throughout their business strategies and operations. 
1. Vision, mission, values and CSR strategy development 2. Employee code of conduct 3. Workforce planning and recruitment 4. Orientation, training, and competence development 5. Compensation and performance management 6. Change management and corporate culture 7. Employee involvement and participation 8. CSR policy and program development 9. Employee communications 10. Measurement, reporting and celebrating successes along the way Academy of Strategic Management Journal, Volume 12, Number 1, 2013 The roadmap appears sequential, but in practice, since an organization may have done some of these activities, it is feasible for HR managers to start from the middle and work in all directions in order to continuously improve the triple bottom line and to help enhance the firm’s capability for self renewal or cultural change. 
Monitoring achievements and addressing problems are essential to continuously improving the CSR strategies and their implementations across borders. 
In summary, organizations worldwide increasingly recognize the vital importance of incorporating CSR and sustainability into their organizational culture, vision, and business strategy. 
HR and IHR functions stand as a key organizational leader in assessing, formulating, and implementing strategic CSR according to the firm-industry specific situation. 
IHR professionals can take the lead or partner with various internal constituents across functions and through all levels. 
IHR professionals can also play a key role as a network builder to connect the firm with diverse internal and external stakeholders, transfer competence and knowledge between headquarters and subsidiaries, audit and address business ethics and CSR issues throughout supply chain management, and integrate CSR values and strategic objectives into “the way we do business around the world”. 
DISCUSSIONS AND CONCLUSION Over the last three decades and especially over the first century of the new millennium, the volume of international trade and foreign direct investment (FDI) has increased dramatically through trade liberalization and accelerated economic globalization, bringing companies and their managers into ongoing contact with diverse business partners, competitors, consumers, and communities across national borders. 
The world has also been confronted with various economic, social, and environmental challenges, as reflected in the recent worldwide financial crisis, the Occupy movement, and growing climate change concerns. 
While for many people and individual firms, globalization has become a reality, business ethics and CSR concepts have not yet been globalized. 
As demonstrated in this study, convergence and divergence coexist. To a large extent, attitudes and approaches toward ethics and CSR are rooted in differing cultural traditions, social norms, economic conditions, regulatory institutions, and business practices. 
Consequently MNCs are often faced with ethical dilemmas within their specific competitive context. 
Among the top challenges is how to identify, prioritize, and tackle CSR issues that matter most to the organization and would also produce maximum social benefit to local communities. 
A myriad of issues such as labor practices, environment, and business-society relations have caught the attention of executives, academics, trade unions, public officials, mass media, and global watchdog activists. 
Costs, unproven benefits and economic hard times, among others, present real challenges to CSR decision making and commitment. 
Added to the complexity are marked differences and variation in cultural values, stakeholder expectations, national wealth, and regulatory institutional conditions. 
Academy of Strategic Management Journal, Volume 12, Number 1, 2013 The present study adds knowledge and strategic implications to the existing CSR literature in several ways. 
First, the study navigates the CSR components as closely aligned with potential strategic options in the cross-cultural context, with special attention to high-tech MNCs expanding their operations from advanced societies to emerging economies. 
Through this endeavor the study provides a comprehensive review of the existing literature along with firmindustry specific cases. 
Based on existing literature, empirical findings and case analysis, the study offers deepened knowledge of the construct of CSR, thereby providing a cross-cultural framework of strategic options for firms to assess, compose, and implement. 
Second, the study sheds light on the key role that the HR and IHR functions can play in helping firms identify, prioritize and achieve CSR objectives domestically and across borders. 
Among key issues are managing CSR within the context of dynamic socioeconomic changes and the rising need to accommodate diverse and often conflicting values and norms aligned with the multi-faceted strategic considerations and corporate moral standards. 
As social norms and institutional rules continue to be local, often having loopholes for corporate scandals or misconduct because of weak supervision by enforcement agencies, disparity in economic development, or different social expectations and priorities, MNCs’ HR/IHR functions have a special role to play in communication, training, integrating, monitoring, and enforcement of an organization’s well established moral standards and global regulations within the strategic IHR paradigm. 
Third, the study also provides practical implications. 
We propose that successful CSR strategies and practices rely heavily on enlightened people both internally and externally. 
Employee involvement programs and professional networking equip a MNC’s IHR function to gain additional knowledge and information about how CSR is positioned in other companies within the same industry, specific challenges to the companies pursuing CSR goals, and main concerns to the local communities. 
Through this endeavor, IHR can help connect internal and external stakeholders in a firm’s strategic CSR process, thereby different stakeholder groups become actively involved rather than being treated as uninvolved, segregated constituencies. 
In practice, however, CSR efforts are oftentimes resisted or faced with obstacles due to cost concerns, difficulty to track CSR investment or practices to short-term return, and lack of support from top management. 
In addition, various stakeholder groups are often segregated from one another. 
Economic and social objectives are often seen as distinct and competing. 
By presenting a context-focused CSR approach, this study highlights both potential tangible and intangible benefits to the firm, both short-term and long-term economic returns to the shareholders, and how improvement of the competitive context holistically through CSR efforts (e.g., public health, education, infrastructure, natural conservation, etc.) will connect the firm with better quality of life in the local community and contribute to the larger good of society, thus promoting a convergence of interests between business and society. 
Academy of Strategic Management Journal, Volume 12, Number 1, 2013 To conclude, the theoretical propositions and CSR strategic implications in the crosscultural context raised in the present study await future research and more in-depth case studies to further refine the knowledge and better transfer to the practical field and business education. 
REFERENCES Angelidis, J. & Ibrahim, N. (2004). 
An exploratory study of the impact of degree of religiousness upon an individual’s corporate social responsiveness orientation. 
Journal of Business Ethics, 51(2), 119-128. 
Bies, R., Bartunek, J., Fort T. & Zald, M. N. (2007). 
Corporations as social change agents: Individual, interpersonal, institutional, and environmental dynamics. 
Academy of Management Review, 32(3), 788–793. 
Carroll, A.B. (1979). 
The three dimensional model of corporate performance. 
Academy of Management Review, 4, 497-505. 
Carroll, A.B. (1991). 
The pyramid of corporate social responsibility: Toward the moral management of organizational stakeholders. 
Business Horizons, July-August, 39-48. 
Carroll, A.B. (1999). 
Corporate social responsibility: evolution of a definitional construct. 
Business and Society, 38(3), 268-295. 
Dawkins, J. & Lewis, S. (2003). 
CSR in stakeholder expectation and their implications for company strategy. 
Journal of Business Ethics, 44(2/3), 185-193. 
Donaldson, T. & Preston, L.E. (1995). 
The stakeholder theory of the corporation: concepts, evidence, and implications. 
Academy of Management Review, 22(1), 65-91. 
Enderle, G. (2004). 
Global competition and corporate responsibilities of small and medium-sized enterprises, Business Ethics: A European Review, 13(1), 51-63. 
Freeman, R.E. (1984). 
Strategic Management: A Stakeholder Approach. 
Pitman Publishers, MA: Marshfield. 
Friedman, M. (1970). 
The social responsibility of business is to increase its profits. 
New York Times Magazine, September 13, 32-33, 122, 124, 126. 
Friedman, M. (1996). 
“The social responsibility of business is to increase profits.” In S.B. 
Rae and K.L. 
Wong (Eds.), Beyond Integrity: A Judeo-Christian Approach, 241-245. 
Zondervan Publishing House, MI: Grand Rapids. 
Galbreath, J. (2006). 
Corporate social responsibility strategy: strategic options, global considerations. 
Corporate Governance, 6(2), 175-187. 
Hemingway, C.A. & Maclagan, P.W. (2004). 
Managers’ personal values as drivers of corporate social responsibility. 
Journal of Business Ethics, 50(1), 33-44. 
Hill, M.A., Ireland, R.D. & Hoskisson, R.E. (2001). 
Strategic Management: Competitiveness and Globalization. 
Southwestern College Publishing-Thomson Learning, HO: Cincinnati. 
Joyner, B.E. & Payne, D. (2002). 
Evolution and implementation: a study of values, business ethics and corporate social responsibility. 
Journal of Business Ethics, 41(4), 297-311. 
Lantos, G.P. (2001). 
The boundaries of strategic corporate social responsibility. 
Journal of Consumer Marketing, 18(7), 595-630. 
Lantos, G.P. (2002). 
The ethicality of altruistic corporate social responsibility. 
Journal of Consumer Marketing, 19(3), 205-230. 
Margolis, J.D. & Walsh, J.P. (2003). 
Misery loves companies: rethinking social initiatives by business. 
Administrative Science Quarterly, 48(2), 265-305. 
McWilliams, A. & Siegel, D. (2000). 
Corporate social responsibility and financial performance: correlation or misspecification? 
Strategic Management Journal, 21, 603-609. 
McWilliams, A. & Siegel, D. (2001). 
Corporate social responsibility: A theory of the firm perspective. 
Academy of Management Review, 26, 117-127. 
Academy of Strategic Management Journal, Volume 12, Number 1, 2013 McWilliams, A., Siegel, D. S. & Wright, P. M. (2006). 
Corporate social responsibility: international perspectives for Journal of Business Strategies, Guest Editors’ Introduction. 
Special Issue, Journal of Business Strategies (spring) 23, 1-7. 
McWilliams, A., Siegel, D. S. & Wright, P. M. (2006). 
Corporate social responsibility: strategic implications. 
Journal of Management Studies, 43(1), 1-18. 
Pinkston, T. & Carroll, A. (1996). 
A retrospective examination of CSR orientations: have they changed. 
Journal of Business Ethics, 15(2), 199-207. 
Porter, M. E. & Kramer, M. R. (2002). 
The competitive advantage of corporate philanthropy, Harvard Business Review, December, reprint R0212D, 5-16. 
Porter, M. E. & Kramer, M. R. (2006). 
Strategy & society: The link between competitive advantage and corporate social responsibility. 
Harvard Business Review, December, reprint R0612D. 
Rana, P., Platts, J. & Gregory, M. (2009). 
Exploration of corporate social responsibility (CSR) in multinational companies within the food industry. 
Queen’s Discussion Paper Series on Corporate Responsibility Research, 2/2009. 
Belfast: Queen’s University. 
Ross, W.D. (2000). 
“Intuitionism”. 
In L.P. 
Pojman (Ed.), The Moral Life: An Judeo-Christian Approach to Business Ethics, 318-333. 
Oxford University Press, NY: New York. 
Rowley, T. & Berman, S. (2000). 
A brand new brand of corporate social performance. 
Business and Society, 39(4), 397-418. 
Sethi, S.P. (2003). 
Globalization and the good corporation: a need for proactive co-existence. 
Journal of Business Ethics, 43(1/2), 21-31. 
Society for Human Resource Management (SHRM, 2007). 
Corporate Social Responsibility: United States, Australia, India, China, Canada, Mexico and Brazil. 
SHRM Research Department, VA: Alexandria. 
Strandberg, C. (2009). 
The role of human resource management in corporate social responsibility: Issues brief and roadmap. 
Report for Industry Canada, May 2009, Strandberg Consulting, BC: Burnaby, Canada. 
Volkswagen Group (2012). 
Sustainability and Responsibility: CSR World Wide. 
Retrieved March 5, from http://www.volkswagenag.com/content/vwcorp/content/en/sustainability_and_responsibility/CSR_worldwi de.html. 
Waldman, D.A., de Luque, M.S., Washburn, N. & House, R.J. (2006). 
Cultural and leadership predictors of corporate social responsibility values of top management: a GLOBE study of 15 countries. 
Journal of International Business Studies, 37, 823-837. 
Yang, N. Colvin, C. & Wong, Y. (2012). 
Corporate social responsibility and global competitiveness: The case of high-tech industry in China. 
Special Issue, Journal of Business Ethics. 
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. 
Further reproduction prohibited without permission. 