Keywords Resilience Á Landscape planning Á Management Á Social learning Á Adaptation Á Ecosystem services Introduction Landscapes are spatially bounded entities that are heterogeneous in many key elements and processes of interest. They typically encompass both social (socioeconomic) and ecological subsystems. 
These subsystems are often treated separately, but in reality they coexist in a close relationship; humans are profoundly dependent on ecosystems for their wellbeing, and ecosystems have been hugely modified by people (Walker and Salt 2006). 
If we consider an entire landscape and its constituents as a complex, adaptive social-ecological system (as argued by Cumming 2011a, b; see Table 1 for definitions of terms used in this article), then one of the more important questions in the context of landscape sustainability and resilience is whether, and how, we can prod the system towards improved and/or more G. S. Cumming (&) Percy FitzPatrick Institute, DST/NRF Center of Excellence, University of Cape Town, Rondebosch, Cape Town 7701, South Africa e-mail: graeme.cumming@uct.ac.za P. Olsson University of Stockholm, Stockholm, Sweden F. S. Chapin III Institute of Arctic Biology, University of Alaska Fairbanks, Fairbanks, AK 99775, USA C. S. Holling 220 Canterbury Crescent, Nanaimo, BC V9T 4S4, Canada Table 1 Definitions of some of the terms used in the article Term and relevant references Definition Landscape (Turner et al. 2001) A bounded area containing heterogeneity in patterns and/or processes of interest Social-Ecological System (SES) (Berkes et al. 2003) A linked system of people and nature in which people depend on nature and nature is influenced by people Complex system, complex adaptive system (Simon 1962; Allen and Starr 1982; Gell-Mann 1992; Norberg and Cumming 2008) Complex systems are defined (self-referentially) as systems that exhibit complex behaviours or dynamics. 
Complex system behaviours include, but are not limited to, non-linear relationships between cause and effect; the presence of feedback loops which can regulate or amplify trends; the potential for alternate system states that are maintained by different regimes; and the ability to process information and respond to it. Complex adaptive systems, such as people and ant colonies, are capable of modifying their structure or behaviour in response to external changes in the environment Sustainability (WCED 1987; Kates et al. 2001; Norberg and Cumming 2008) First introduced to the policy arena by the Bruntland Report (WCED 1987) which defined sustainable development as development that ‘‘meets the needs of the present generation without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their needs’’. 
Also defined as ‘‘the equitable, ethical, and efficient use of natural resources’’ (see discussion in Norberg and Cumming 2008). 
Inclusion of ‘Efficiency’ is contentious in some circles Landscape sustainability The application of the concept of sustainability over a broad extent. 
Landscape sustainability can be viewed as the degree to which patterns and processes occurring within a landscape (and their interactions) can be expected to persist indefinitely into the future. 
For example, an analysis of landscape sustainability in a forested region might consider forests, the livelihoods of people who rely on non-timber forest products, and external demands for timber Resilience (Holling 1973; Gunderson 2000; Carpenter et al. 2001) (1) The amount of disturbance that a system can absorb while still remaining within the same state or domain of attraction; (2) the degree to which the system is capable of selforganization (versus lack of organization or organization forced by external factors); and (3) the degree to which the system can build and increase its capacity for learning and adaptation (Carpenter et al. 2001) Landscape resilience (Nystrom and Folke 2001; Cumming 2011a, b) Used here to refer to the resilience of an entire landscape, viewed as a spatially located complex adaptive system that includes both social and ecological components and their interactions Landscape resilience and landscape sustainability are closely related. 
Perhaps the most relevant distinction is that common usage of the concept of sustainability emphasizes a ‘business as usual’ scenario that focuses on current rates of exploitation and growth, whereas the concept of resilience emphasizes more heavily the ability of the system to cope with perturbations (and the related topics of uncertainty, innovation, and adaptation). 
Resilience further highlights the relevance of system memory and cyclical change (the ‘panarchy’ of the adaptive cycle) although the adaptive cycle should not be conflated with the concept of resilience Landscape planning and management (Prato 2000; Ludwig 2001; Cumming and Spiesman 2006) The process of attempting to regulate and control different patterns and processes within a landscape, often within the context of attaining a stated goal that relates to system function (e.g., ecosystem service provision or ecological sustainability). 
For example, management of a forested landscape might seek to control deforestation processes so that at least 45% of a landscape remains forested, permitting dispersal of canopy-dependent organisms; or management of urban sprawl might seek to keep further urban expansion and development within a predefined boundary. 
We use landscape planning to capture the idea of forwardlooking policies and institutions and landscape management to refer to the regulation and control of existing broad-scale patterns, processes, and pattern-process interactions. 
These distinctions may in some cases be arbitrary; for example, city zoning laws influence both current and future urban sprawl Experimentation The idea of experimentation in this context captures the process of a deliberate, premeditated manipulation of system elements in a way that is designed to improve our understanding of the system as well as to identify better solutions to particular problems. 
Experimental design should usually adhere to proven scientific norms, such as having a control group or system and a sufficient sample size. 
The guiding context is that of adaptive management, in which alternative approaches to management are contrasted as part of a structured learning process Learning networks (Manring 2007; WRI 2008) Learning networks are informal, interpersonal and inter-organizational. They contribute to sharing information, experiences, and lessons learned by trial and error. 
Learning networks are instrumental in adapting new ideas to different landscape management situations. 
resilient delivery of the two closely related elements of ecosystem services and human wellbeing (MA 2003, 2005). 
In this paper we advocate an approach that involves the development of learning networks on the one hand, and on the other, developing solutions to current problems through deliberate experimentation together with the initiation of social learning processes. 
Manipulations of complex adaptive systems are non-trivial. Complex adaptive systems typically contain feedbacks and non-linearities, as well as possessing the capacity to self-organize; manipulations can have surprising and unintended consequences (e.g., Foley et al. 2003; Folke et al. 2004; Liu et al. 2007). 
For these reasons, as well as the practical difficulties involved in making changes to large systems, manipulations that have been successful in complex adaptive systems have often been modest in size and have worked within the system’s grassroots capacity for adaptation and learning rather than imposing a particular planning or management goal from the top down (e.g., Sarch 2001; Bohensky 2008). 
An informative example of a successful institutional change that enhanced landscape sustainability is provided by management of the boreal forest in New Brunswick, Canada. 
Prior to WWII, natural heterogeneity in the landscape in the eastern part of the continental boreal forest was maintained largely by spruce budworm outbreaks, coupled with fire. 
A pulp and paper industry developed after WWII, but it became threatened by an anticipated region-wide killing of Balsam by spruce budworm outbreaks. 
The goal became to ‘‘keep the forest green’’ through control of spruce budworm using spraying of insecticide and traditional harvesting of mature trees. 
Budworm densities were reduced, but only to a moderate level. 
The reduction led to a shift from boom-and-bust outbreaks to slow, spreading deterioration of balsam fir. 
During this period the natural fir/ spruce system shifted from having c.500 ha stands (i.e., areas containing trees of similar age) to stands of 50–100 ha. As stand sizes gradually declined, the scale of spatial heterogeneity decreased, budworm dispersal between patches of suitable structure was facilitated, and the system increasingly became an accident waiting to happen (Ludwig et al. 1978; Radeloff et al. 2000). 
Then interdisciplinary science led to the first step in evolving new policy. 
The space/time dynamics of budworm, tree dynamics and tree harvesting were explored from scales of the needles, to branches, to trees, to stands, to the forest as a whole. 
Models of the non-linear connecting processes, as well as of tree harvesting and of alternative spray and harvest policies over space and time, were designed and tested. 
It emerged from these exercises that in order to harvest sustainably with little eventual insecticide use, substantial changes were required in tree inventory, spraying rules, spatial harvesting, and protection of the species diversity of the controlling bird predators (Thompson et al. 1979; Crawford and Jennings 1989). 
Key scientific, economic, industrial and environmental leaders became partners in the discoveries, but opposition to the implementation of new policies was entrenched. 
Policies were finally changed, and a new regional management plan implemented, when a political election gave power to a new party in the province. 
The minister of the new party appointed a new deputy who happened to be one of the leaders of the more integrated research and communication programme. 
He was charged with instituting a new design and associated policies for forest management within the Province at the various key scales and was able to become an effective agent of change. 
As this example shows, planning and management for landscape sustainability and resilience typically entails numerous feedback loops and processes operating across multiple scales and at different speeds, as well as both social and ecological elements of the system. 
Significant landscape change required new Table 1 continued Term and relevant references Definition Social learning (Social_Learning_Group 2001; Reed et al. 2010) Social learning refers to learning by doing through experience in successful group processes. 
According to Reed et al. (2010) a process of social learning must: ‘‘(1) demonstrate that a change in understanding has taken place in the individuals involved; (2) demonstrate that this change goes beyond the individual and becomes situated within wider social units or communities of practice; and (3) occur through social interactions and processes between actors within a social network’’ Where appropriate, we have provided both ‘classic’ references and references that illustrate the contemporary usage of each term learning through observation and modeling, followed by changes in governance that enabled a new framework for landscape management to emerge. 
Various principles for enhancing the sustainability and resilience of ecosystems have emerged from different disciplines (e.g., see Daily and Ehrlich 1996; Kates et al. 2001; Holling et al. 2002; Cumming 2011a). 
In landscape ecology, for example, proposed approaches include the maintenance of landscape connectivity, source areas and refuges for key functional groups (e.g., hedgerows between fields to support populations of predatory invertebrates (Burel 1996)), and habitat complementarity (i.e., ensuring access to habitats used for breeding, foraging, and shelter) (e.g., Comiskey et al. 2002). 
A different stream of research, in human geography, urban planning and sociology, has focused on human use of landscapes (particularly the built environment, such as cities and transportation networks) and on social and economic influences on landscape structure. 
For example, the problems of urban sprawl and the influence of location on economic success have provided important themes for the exploration of the interactions between spatial arrangement and landscape-level socioeconomic processes (Brueckner 2000; Liu et al. 2003). 
A third area of literature has focused on the human dimension of conservation—particularly that relating to adaptive management, learning, and innovation—and has pursued questions of organizational and institutional flexibility within a context of landscape management (e.g., Walters 1986; Norton and Steinemann 2001; Nelson et al. 2007). 
These three areas of enquiry have not yet coalesced to provide a more general, interdisciplinary synthesis for understanding and predicting landscape resilience (Cumming 2011b). 
In this article we explore the relationships between resilience, scale, and the provision of ecosystem services. 
We start by outlining the relevance of scale and scale mismatches as a unifying concept that integrates social and ecological perspectives. 
We then briefly review the literature on institutional design before arguing that, rather than attempting to follow a set of rigid prescriptions to achieve landscape sustainability, planning and managing for sustainable landscapes require the establishment of institutional arenas in which learning and experimentation can be used to identify and test a diversity of contextually relevant social, ecological, and social-ecological solutions. 
Scale as a unifying concept Scale is a unifying concept that connects social (including socioeconomic) systems and ecosystems (Levin 1999;ChaveandLevin2003). 
Each of the patterns and processes that occur on a landscape has an extent (area occupied or influenced) and grain (resolution). 
Landscape resilience depends heavily on finding an appropriate match between the scales of demands on ecosystems by human societies and the scales at which ecosystems are capable of meeting these demands (Cumming et al. 2006; Folke et al. 2007). 
The scales of ecosystem service provision, as measured using spatially explicit data on natural habitats and resource exploitation, are relatively straightforward to quantify and map in space (e.g., using land cover maps together with economic surveys) and form the basis of most landscape ecology studies on sustainability and landscape structure (e.g., Leitao and Ahern 2002;Rustigian et al. 2003). 
The scales of societal demand, by contrast, drive and modify spatial patterns in the landscape in a far less obvious way. 
Global economic networks and transport infrastructure can result in spatial transfers of demand that may span continents and may in turn separate the demand for ecosystem services and the ecosystems that provide the services (Berkes et al. 2006). 
For instance, most consumers in Europe have little idea of how and where any African vegetables that they eat have been produced and what the ecological and social impacts of their production have been. 
Broadscale transfers of demand, coupled with a diversity of sources of supply, lead to very loose feedbacks between supply and demand (as discussed by Levin (1999)) and hence create the potential for significant functional mismatches between societal demand for ecosystem services and the capacity of ecosystems to provide these services in a sustainable manner (Fig.1). 
Scale mismatches can reduce system resilience and force the system towards undesirable states. 
For example, severe environmental degradation (such as desertification and deforestation) can often be attributed to scale mismatches (e.g., see models and examples in Geist and Lambin 2004; Lambin and Geist 2006). 
The frequent occurrence of scale mismatches between ecosystem service provision and societal demand is hardly surprising when a holistic view of the problem is taken. 
Landscape planning and management inevitably encounter tradeoff situations between the needs and demands of humans and the maintenance of different ecological components and functions (Rodriguez et al. 2006). 
The growing human population and potential limits to its growth may have profound consequences for social-ecological resilience (Rockstrom et al. 2009). 
The crux of the problem of fostering sustainable, resilient landscapes is thus the problem of designing or developing appropriate institutions that will act flexibly, proactively, and at appropriate scales to strengthen feedbacks that modify and moderate demand for ecosystem services and incorporate the tradeoffs between human wellbeing, profit, and the exploitation of ecosystems (see also Kates et al. 2001). 
Principles of institutional design A starting point for the design of institutions for sustainable environmental management is provided by the principles developed by Lin Ostrom and colleagues (e.g., Ostrom 1990, 2003, 2007, 2009). 
They lay out several general features of institutions that facilitate but do not guarantee sustainable management of ecosystems. 
Institutions that obey these principles cannot usually be ‘created’ but must grow and develop through some form of social learning (Burgman and Fox 2003). 
We have an extremely limited grasp of how to create the conditions that allow emergence of broad-scale institutions that can produce tangible change on the ground. 
The many unsolved global problems that require collective action lend additional support to this somewhat bleak perspective. 
Even if institutions could be designed using Ostrom-type guidelines, however, another glaring problem remains: in many cases, we do not know the best solution to a specific social-ecological problem or the risks associated with a given decision (Stirling 2007). 
A transparent, democratic decision-making Fig. 1 The production of ecosystem services in a given landscape depends on the space-structured interactions between hierarchical governance structures, landscape policy, and management or implementation actions. 
Here, governance structures are depicted at three hierarchical levels—national, regional and local—represented by white rectangles that are proportional in length to their extent of jurisdiction. 
At each time step, the process of experimentation involves locally testing alternative policy and management approaches that are indicated by differences in the shading of the policy and management boxes. 
Some of these experiments work (indicated by a tick underneath) and others fail (indicated by a cross underneath). 
If learning then occurs, governance structures may themselves be realigned to better address scale mismatches; and both positive and negative outcomes may be used to design more effective approaches to policy and management. 
Over time, this process should lead to improvements in both the functioning of governance structures and the effectiveness of landscape management body that is managed according to the best principles of governance may still make a bad decision that has severe consequences for local people. 
Upper-level (‘top-down’) governance decisions, such as the creation of new laws and organizations, may offer a potentially effective route to landscape sustainability (e.g., China’s imposition of a blanket ban on logging in the upper reaches of the Yangtse (Zhang et al. 2000)); but top-down solutions often lack local support and consequently are vulnerable to failure (Robbins 2004). 
The most effective way to move towards sustainable landscapes appears to be to deliberately encourage local and regional social-ecological experiments that allow social learning to occur within the context of finding long-term solutions to chronic, broad-scale problems. 
Experimentation and learning for landscape sustainability The idea of experimentation in this context captures the process of a deliberate, premeditated manipulation of system elements in a way that is designed to improve our understanding of the system as well as to identify better solutions to particular problems. 
Although direct experimentation on social-ecological systems raises a host of ethical issues, there is no obvious ethical problem in deliberately adopting a policy of encouraging a diversity of approaches to problem solving—‘management experiments’—coupled with careful monitoring of outcomes (Fig. 1). Consideration of the factors that contribute to system resilience suggests that, on average, systems with higher diversity are more likely to prove resilient to change, because they have more possible responses (Walker 1992; Yachi and Loreau 1999). 
Adaptation in ecosystems typically occurs by the action of selection on diversity (Levin 1999), meaning that it is in some sense a product of diversity. 
The same principle is often true in human societies; adoption of a greater diversity of policies or management approaches may make it more likely that a successful solution (whether adaptation or mitigation) will emerge. 
One approach to encouraging diversity is to foster innovation and experimentation at a given scale so that different groups (e.g., human communities, landholders, or firms) have the flexibility and incentives to envision and explore different potential solutions to a problem (Fig. 1). This approach is widespread in business but is equally applicable to human communities, for example through alternative policy frameworks to reduce greenhouse gas emissions or vulnerability to coastal flooding (e.g., armouring of coastlines versus zoning to discourage development in zones of high risk). 
A second approach is to link institutions that have overlapping responsibilities at different scales, with institutions at each scale able to address different components of a multi-scale problem. 
Research on common property resources has highlighted the problem-solving value of ‘‘polycentric’’ institutions—that is, nested, quasi-autonomous decision-making units operating at multiple scales (e.g., Ostrom 1998; McGinnis 2000; Dietz et al. 2003). 
It has been proposed that polycentric structures can address environmental problems at multiple scales more readily than centralised governance structures because they have a greater variety of response capabilities (Ostrom 1998) and can ‘‘encourage innovation and experimentation by allowing individuals and organizations to explore different ideas about solving [complex] problems’’ (Imperial 2004). 
Polycentric approaches can, however, run into problems with coordination and accountability, so are not necessarily a universal panacea. 
Both long-term monitoring and the creation and implementation of diversity in problem-solving approaches will rely on adaptive governance and management approaches that (1) stimulate social learning by involving actors at multiple levels, from local to global; (2) support the translation and diffusion of new knowledge and practices, creating a continuous feedback between research and implementation and potentially transforming societal attitudes and motivations; and (3) offer ‘‘safety nets’’ to communities that are willing to engage in potentially risky experimentation. 
Rather than optimising the production of single variables (such as wheat or water) or adopting a single management approach such as irrigation to address periodic drought, a social learning approach as envisaged here will aim to enhance the general resilience of desirable features of linked social-ecological systems to perturbations such as climate change, while mitigating their impacts where possible. 
The approach enhances system resilience by increasing the adaptive capacity of the system, making system agents more responsive to environmental change, while also facilitating the proactive development of new solutions to current problems. 
There are two central aspects of a social learning approach in this context: (1) the process of learning to learn, and (2) the notion of adaptive governance, including the development of safety nets. 
Although we treat these as separate issues for the sake of clarity, in reality they should proceed in tandem (Fig. 1). Aspect 1: learning to learn The idea of ‘learning to learn’ implies the creation of a state of preparedness for the assimilation of new knowledge. 
In a typical educational system, preparedness is achieved through a socialisation process that begins when a child is small and starts by teaching core values and behaviours (e.g., respect for others, listening to the teacher, a work ethic) that are essential for later learning. 
In much the same way, the individuals within organizations that have relevance for landscape planning and management can be involved in social processes, such as directed workshops and seminars that are intended to sensitize them to the value of adopting a more learning-focused approach and prepare them to contribute more directly to building landscape sustainability and resilience. 
‘Learning to learn’ in the context of landscape planning and management implies that actions are undertaken (e.g., policy development, creation of new incentives, or workshops with residents) that create the necessary conditions for social learning, based on the idea that social learning is fundamentally about collaboration and practice (Burgman and Fox 2003; Cundill et al. 2012). 
Various typologies and approaches to learning in collaborative environmental management situations have been outlined (e.g., Argyris and Schoen 1978; Cook et al. 2004; Garaway and Arthur 2004; Fazey et al. 2005; Armitage et al. 2008; Berkes 2009; Krasny et al. 2010). 
Many of these authors emphasize the value of repeated interactions among a group of actors and the importance of trust and relationship building as part of building capacity to learn from, respond to, and manage environmental feedback from dynamic ecosystems. 
‘Learning to learn’ involves abandoning behaviours and ways of working that have become routine and habitual and that hinder integrated, flexible forms of landscape planning and management. 
This process of changing attitudes and ingrained patterns of behaviour has been referred to as ‘‘unlearning’’ (see, for example, Robinson 1988; Bainbridge et al. 2000; Becker 2005). 
Learning can occur in a variety of ways that range from the simple acquisition of new skills to more profound (‘transformational’) learning (sensu Mezirow 2000). 
Transformational learning often occurs in response to a crisis that exposes weaknesses in the current paradigm and often leads to a dramatic change in strategy. 
Transformational learning in its strongest sense entails a complete revision of current assumptions and worldviews in which an old paradigm is abandoned and replaced with something new. 
For example, wetland degradation and a pending crisis in Kristianstad in southern Sweden in the 1980s triggered a transformation from conventional top-down resource management to a flexible co-management approach. 
The response led to new institutions, organizations, and interpersonal and inter-organizational interactions. 
A central component of this paradigm shift was a shift from seeing the wetlands as wastelands to viewing them as important ecosystems that generate essential services (Olsson et al. 2004). 
In practice, transformational learning will often be accompanied by the creation of new organizations (as opposed to reorganizations of existing structures), the adoption of new management approaches, and changes in institutions such as tenure and harvesting rights. 
Aspect 2: learning and adaptive governance The second important aspect of a social learning approach is the development of social mechanisms that facilitate the linkage of innovations with solutions (Fig. 1). Such adoption must reach key managers and decision makers in a comprehensible format that can filter both up and down hierarchies of decision makers. 
Resilience solutions have been developed and implemented for regional problems since the early 1970s (e.g., Holling 1973). 
The projects that have successfully implemented political and policy changes have done so by creating a paradigm shift, from economic growth and free enterprise on the one hand to the integration of nature, culture and economics and the detection and monitoring of system dynamics on the other. 
Successful navigation of change requires, as a goal, that we sustain flexibility (ecological, social and economic) while explicitly recognizing, and even testing, the edge of chaos. 
One route to transformation is through a sequence of workshops, where models and understanding are developed; public meetings, where stereotypes are changed and lobbies competitively balanced; and politics, where influence is engaged. 
Communication and debate is critical at all stages. 
Experience (in the case of CSH, from over 50 years of working in this field) suggests that far-reaching transformations of public, management and political communities occur only when four critical features are present. 
They include (1) a new vision; (2) trust among a small, active group of at least 10–20 people committed to guide the process; (3) a leader or leaders of great respect in the region; and (4) a recognition that the unknown is greater than the sum of the known and the uncertain, and therefore that large scale or multi-scale hypotheses and experiments are essential as simultaneous learning actions with management. 
Implementation itself depends on the timeliness (‘readiness’) for deep change within the region, a timeliness that is set by external events. 
Most social-ecological systems are open to largescale change only at certain critical times (Holling and Gunderson 2002; Westley et al. 2002; Olsson et al. 2006). 
These ‘windows of opportunity’ often arise in response to a crisis, particularly if the crisis highlights weaknesses of an existing approach or paradigm. 
Crises may be caused by events such as increases in energy prices, changes in the macro-political environment, new scientific findings, regime shifts in ecosystems, external perturbations, or a rapid loss of ecosystem services (Olsson et al. 2006; Farley et al. 2007). 
Climate change is a looming crisis for which current approaches to landscape management may prove inadequate. 
For example, rather than treating a protected area as a static fortress that will protect ecologically important populations, conservation efforts must consider the needs of organisms to migrate in response to climate change (Millar et al. 2007; Hobbs et al. 2010). 
This requires greater attention to the working landscapes in which conservation areas are embedded to create migration corridors through, for example, wetland mitigation, management for carbon sequestration, and changes in subsidies that influence land-management choices (Chapin et al. 2006). 
It is vital to develop learning institutions that ensure that solutions are tested in a well-monitored fashion, that relevant uncertainties are quantified, and that the institutional environment is primed for the rapid assessment and adoption of appropriate solutions. 
Effective learning in the context of landscape planning and management will depend heavily on adaptive governance. 
Some of the key ingredients of adaptive governance include institutional preparedness; a willingness to embrace change as opportunity; the presence of effective leaders and learning networks; a diversity of views and perspectives, where the costs entailed by differences do not overwhelm the benefits; formal mechanisms to learn from experience; and access to key resources, such as the funding necessary to implement novel ideas (Holling 1978; Walters 1997; Folke et al. 2005). 
There is also a strong need for people within governments and multi-lateral organizations to work creatively and inclusively to establish politically and culturally viable ways of allowing innovations to be scaled up, including the creation of new kinds of social networks and bridging organizations that work across scales in multi-level governance systems (Folke et al. 2005). 
For example, an experimental monitoring program to detect sudden climate-induced changes in marine waters is being initiated as a collaboration between scientists and aboriginal communities in the North Pacific, Arctic, and North Atlantic Oceans. 
Monitoring of the same suite of variables by indigenous hunters and fishers and by scientists on icebreakers will connect local communities to communities of climate scientists. 
Participants will discuss their experiences and observations and use the web to accumulate data, maps, and dialogues between participants. 
The underlying goals of the program include the building of understanding and communication about climate change among coastal communities and between scientists and indigenous people. 
In addition, this experiment taps new sources of knowledge and upscales the reach and political influence of indigenous peoples. 
Another important step towards creating a learning environment is to reassess existing policies and institutions with the question of whether, and how, these instruments create an enabling environment for the emergence of learning networks and appropriate responses to climate change—i.e., double and tripleloop learning (Armitage et al. 2007). 
Successful strategies from one place may not be adopted in other places because tenure rights or other institutional conditions do not permit them. 
In the U.S.A., for example, tenure rights can be ‘‘unbundled’’ and sold separately, creating the possibility for habitat protection via the sale of conservation easements (e.g., Naugle et al. 2000); in many other countries, this option is not available. 
Available evidence suggests that learning occurs through a combination of vision, contingency, experimentation, and luck. 
These characteristics are more marked in some approaches to governance than in others. 
For example, the UNESCO’s Man and the Biosphere Program, which includes the World Network of Biosphere Reserves, is an international program that offers a framework for stimulating sustainable development. 
Each reserve or site (564 sites in 109 countries as of April 2011) constitutes a platform for learning about sustainable development and a place to experiment with integrated approaches for managing and governing natural resources and ecosystem services (Nguyen et al. 2010; Schultz and Lundholm 2010). 
Such frameworks have great potential for fostering a diversity of approaches and experiments; with the proper coordination across scales they can increase the pace of learning at critical times. 
Conclusions We have argued in this article that one of the central problems of landscape sustainability is that of aligning the scale of demand for ecosystem services with the scale at which ecosystem services can be sustainably provided. 
We do not believe that one-size-fits-all principles for landscape structure will provide viable solutions. 
Rather, we argue that solving the problem of social-ecological scale mismatches in any given instance will require the development of learning networks that will proactively experiment with and try out a range of possible solutions. 
For the power of diverse social learning approaches to be harnessed in developing and implementing new approaches to landscape design, a clear understanding of the scientific principles relating to ecosystem sustainability is obviously an important element; but scientists are often weak at communicating their results and engaging with stakeholder communities. 
The problem thus needs to work its way through a series of different arenas—problem identification, the development of possible solutions, and the implementation of management and policy—with the involvement of different expertise and stakeholders at different stages (Cumming 2011a). 
None of this will happen unless the political will to achieve landscape sustainability is present (Cronon 2000). 
Perhaps the first and most urgent step in achieving landscape sustainability and resilience is thus to engage with the political process in such a way as to develop a societal desire for sustainable landscapes, by highlighting the many benefits of landscape sustainability and the costs of ignoring it, and to push for this desire to be incorporated into ongoing political processes. 
References Allen TFH, Starr TB (1982) Hierarchy: perspectives for ecological complexity. 
The University of Chicago Press, Chicago Argyris C, Schoen DA (1978) Organizational learning. 
Addison-Wesley Reading, California Armitage D, Berkes F, Doubleday N (eds) (2007) Adaptive comanagement: collaboration, learning, and multi-level governance. 
University of British Columbia Press, Vancouver Armitage D, Marschke M, Plummer R (2008) Adaptive comanagement and the paradox of learning. 
Glob Environ Change 18:86–98 Bainbridge V, Foerster S, Pasteur K, Pimbert MP, Pratt G, Arroyo IY (2000) Transforming Bureaucracies. 
Institutionalising participation in natural resource management. 
An annotated bibliography. 
International institute for environment and development, London, and the Institute for Development Studies, Brighton Becker K (2005) Individual and organizational unlearning: directions for future research. 
Int J Organ Behav 9:659–670 Berkes F (2009) Evolution of co-management: role of knowledge generation, bridging organizations and social learning. 
J Environ Manage 90:1692–1702 Berkes F, Colding J, Folke C (eds) (2003) Navigating socialecological systems: building resilience for complexity and change. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge Berkes F, Hughes TP, Steneck RS, Wilson JA, Bellwood DR, Crona B, Folke C, Gunderson LH, Leslie HM, Norberg J, Nystro¨m M, Olsson P, O ¨ sterblom H, Scheffer M, Worm B (2006) Globalization, roving bandits, and marine resources. 
Science 311:1557–1558 Bohensky EL (2008) Discovering resilient pathways for South African water management: two frameworks for a vision. 
Ecol Soc 13(1):19 Brueckner J (2000) Urban sprawl: diagnosis and remedies. 
Int Reg Sci Rev 23:160–171 Burel F (1996) Hedgerows and their role in agricultural landscapes. 
Crit Rev Plant Sci 15(2):169–190 Burgman M, Fox J (2003) Bias in species range estimates from minimum convex polygons: implications for conservation and options for improved planning. 
Anim Conserv 6(1): 19–28 Carpenter SR, Walker M, Anderies JM, Abel N (2001) From metaphor to measurement: resilience of what to what? 
Ecosystems 4:765–781 Chapin FSI, Hoel M, Carpenter SR, Lubchenco J, Walker B, Callaghan TV, Folke C, Levin S, Ma ¨ ler K-G, Nilsson C, Barrett S, Berkes F, Cre´pin A-S, Danell K, Rosswall T, Starrett D, Xepapadeas T, Zimov SA (2006) Building resilience and adaptation to manage arctic change. 
Ambio 35:198–202 Chave J, Levin S (2003) Scale and scaling in ecological and economic systems. 
Environ Resour Econ 26:527–557 Comiskey EJ, Bass OL, Gross LJ, McBride RT, Salinas R (2002) Panthers and forests in South Florida: an ecological perspective. 
Conserv Ecol 6(1):18–40 Cook W, Casagrande D, Hope D, Groffman P, Collins S (2004) Learning to roll with the punches: adaptive experimentation in human-dominated systems. 
Frontiers Ecol Environ 2:467–474 Crawford HS, Jennings DT (1989) Predation by birds on spruce budworm Choristoneura-Fumiferana—functional, numerical, and total responses. 
Ecology 70(1):152–163 Cronon W (2000) Resisting monoliths and Tabulae Rasae. 
Ecol Appl 10:673–675 Cumming GS (2011a) Spatial resilience in social-ecological systems. 
Springer, London Cumming GS (2011b) Spatial resilience: integrating landscape ecology, resilience, and sustainability. 
Landscape Ecol 26: 899–909 Cumming GS, Spiesman BJ (2006) Regional problems need integrated solutions: pest management and conservation biology in agroecosystems. 
Biol Conserv 131(4):533– 543 Cumming GS, Cumming DHM, Redman CL (2006) Scale mismatches in social-ecological systems: causes, consequences, and solutions. 
Ecol Soc 11:14 Cundill G, Cumming GS, Biggs D, Fabricius C (2012) Soft systems thinking and social learning for adaptive management. 
Conserv Biol 26:13–20 Daily GC, Ehrlich PR (1996) Socioeconomic equity, sustainability, and Earth’s carrying capacity. 
Ecol Appl 6(4):991– 1001 Dietz T, Ostrom E, Stern PC (2003) The struggle to govern the commons. 
Science 302:1907–1912 Farley K, Baker D, Batker D, Koliba C, Matteson R, Mills R, Pittman J (2007) Opening the policy window for ecological economics: Katrina as a focusing event. 
Ecol Econ 63: 344–354 Fazey I, Fazey J, Fazey DM (2005) Learning more effectively from experience. 
Ecol Soc 10:4 (online) http://www. 
ecologyandsociety.org/vol10/iss2/art4 Foley JA, Costa MH, Delire C, Ramankutty N, Snyder P (2003) Green surprise? 
How terrestrial ecosystems could affect earth’s climate. 
Front Ecol Environ 1(1):38–44 Folke C, Carpenter S, Walker B, Scheffer M, Elmqvist T, Gunderson L, Holling CS (2004) Regime shifts, resilience, and biodiversity in ecosystem management. 
Annu Rev Ecol Evol Syst 35:557–581 Folke C, Hahn T, Olsson P, Norberg J (2005) Adaptive governance of social-ecological systems. 
Annu Rev Environ Resour 30:441–473 Folke C, Pritchard L, Berkes F, Colding J, Svedin U (2007) The problem of fit between ecosystems and institutions: ten years later. 
Ecol Soc 12:30 Garaway CJ, Arthur RI (2004) Adaptive learning: a practical framework for the implementation of adaptive co-management—lessons from selected experiences in South and Southeast Asia. 
MRAG Ltd, London Geist HJ, Lambin EF (2004) Dynamic causal patterns of desertification. 
Bioscience 54(9):817–829 Gell-Mann M (1992) Complexity and complex adaptive systems. 
In: Hawkins JA, Gell-Mann M (eds) The evolution ofhuman languages. 
SFI studies in the sciences of complexity. 
Proceedings, vol XI. Addison-Wesley, Massachusetts, pp 3–18 Gunderson LH (2000) Ecological resilience—in theory and application. 
Annu Rev Ecol Syst 31:425–439 Hobbs RJ, Cole DN, Yung L, Zavaleta ES, Aplet GH, Chapin FS, Landres PB, Parsons DJ, Stephenson NL, White PS, Graber DM, Higgs E, Millar CI, Randall JM, Tonnessen KA, Woodley S (2010) Guiding concepts for park and wilderness stewardship in an era of global environmental change. 
Front Ecol Environ 8:483–490 Holling CS (1973) Resilience and stability of ecological systems. 
Annu Rev Ecol Syst 4:1–23 Holling CS (ed) (1978) Adaptive environmental assessment and management. 
Wiley, London Holling CS, Gunderson LH (2002) Resilience and adaptive cycles. 
In: Gunderson LH, Holling CS (eds) Panarchy: understanding transformations in human and natural systems. 
Island Press, Washington, DC, pp 25–62 Holling CS, Gunderson LH, Peterson GD (2002) Sustainability and panarchies. 
In: Gunderson LH, Holling CS (eds) Panarchy: understanding transformations in human and natural systems. 
Island Press, Washington, DC, p 63 Imperial MT (2004) Collaboration and performance measurement: lessons from three watershed governance efforts. 
Center for the Business of Government, Washington Kates RW, Clark WC, Corell R, Hall JM, Jaeger CC, Lowe I, Mccarthy JJ, Schellnhuber HJ, Bolin B, Dickson NM, Faucheux S, Gallopin GC, Grubler A, Huntley B, Jager J, Jodha NS, Kasperson RE, Mabogunje A, Matson P, Mooney H (2001) Environment and development sustainability science. 
Science 292(5517):641–642 Krasny ME, Lundholm C, Plummer R (2010) Resilience in social–ecological systems: the roles of learning and education. 
Environ Educ Res 16:463–474 Lambin EH, Geist HJ (2006) Land-use and land-cover change: local processes and global impacts. 
Springer, Berlin Leitao AB, Ahern J (2002) Applying landscape ecological concepts and metrics in sustainable landscape planning. 
Landsc Urban Plan 59(2):65–93 Levin SA (1999) Fragile dominion: complexity and the commons. 
Perseus Books Reading, Massachusetts Liu JG, Daily GC, Ehrlich PR, Luck GW (2003) Effects of household dynamics on resource consumption and biodiversity. 
Nature 421(6922):530–533 Liu JG, Dietz T, Carpenter SR, Alberti M, Folke C, Moran E, Pell AN, Deadman P, Kratz T, Lubchenco J, Ostrom E, Ouyang Z, Provencher W, Redman CL, Schneider SH, Taylor WW (2007) Complexity of coupled human and natural systems. 
Science 317(5844):1513–1516 Ludwig D (2001) The era of management is over. 
Ecosystems 4(8):758–764 Ludwig D, Jones DD, Holling CS (1978) Qualitative-analysis of insect outbreak systems—spruce budworm and forest. J Anim Ecol 47(1):315–332 MA (2003) (Millennium Assessment): Ecosystems and human well-being: a framework for assessment. 
A report of the conceptual framework working group of the millennium ecosystem assessment. 
Island Press, Washington MA (2005) (Millennium Assesment): Ecosystems and human wellbeing: biodiversity synthesis. 
Island Press, Washington, DC Manring SL (2007) Creating and managing interorganizational learning networks to achieve sustainable ecosystem management. 
Organ Environ 20:325–346 McGinnis M (ed) (2000) Polycentric governance and development. 
University of Michigan Press, Michigan Mezirow J (2000) Learning to think like an adult: core concepts of transformative theory. 
In: Mezirow J et al (eds) Learning as transformation. 
Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, pp 3–34 Millar CI, Stephenson NL, Stephens SL (2007) Climate change and forests of the future: managing in the face of uncertainty. 
Ecol Appl 17:2145–2151 Naugle DE, Johnson RR, Estey ME, Higgins KF (2000) A landscape approach to conserving wetland bird habitat in the prairie, pothole region of eastern South Dakota. 
Wetlands 20(4):588–604 Nelson DR, Adger WN, Brown K (2007) Adaptation to environmental change: contributions of a resilience framework. 
Annu Rev Environ Resour 32:395–419 Nguyen NC, Bosch OJH, Maani KE (2010) Creating ‘learning laboratories’ for sustainable development in biospheres: a systems thinking approach. 
Syst Res Behav Sci 28:51–62 Norberg J, Cumming GS (eds) (2008) Complexity theory for a sustainable future. 
Columbia University Press, New York Norton BG, Steinemann AC (2001) Environmental values and adaptive management. 
Environ Values 10(4):473–506 Nystrom M, Folke C (2001) Spatial resilience of coral reefs. 
Ecosystems 4:406–417 Olsson P, Folke C, Hahn T (2004) Social-ecological transformation for ecosystem management: the development of adaptive co-management of a wetland landscape in southern Sweden. 
Ecol Soc 9(4):2 Olsson P, Gunderson LH, Carpenter SR, Ryan P, Lebel L, Folke C, Holling CS (2006) Shooting the rapids: navigating transitions to adaptive governance of social-ecological systems. 
Ecol Soc 11:18. 
http://www.ecologyandsociety. org/vol11/iss1/art18/ Ostrom E (1990) Governing the commons: the evolution of institutions for collective action. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge Ostrom E (1998) The international forestry resources and institutions research program: a methodology for relating human incentives and actions on forest cover and biodiversity. 
In: Dallmeier F, Comiskey JA (eds) Forest biodiversity in North, Central and South America, and the Caribbean: research and monitoring. 
Man and the biosphere series, 22. The Parthenon Publishing Group, Carnforth Ostrom E (2003) How types of goods and property rights jointly affect collective action. 
J Theor Politics 15(3):239–270 Ostrom E (2007) A diagnostic approach for going beyond panaceas. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104(39):15181–15187 Ostrom E (2009) A general framework for analyzing sustainability of social-ecological systems. 
Science 352:419–422 Prato T (2000) Multiple attribute evaluation of landscape management. 
J Environ Manage 60(4):325–337 Radeloff VC, Mladenoff DJ, Boyce MS (2000) The changing relation of landscape patterns and jack pine budworm populations during an outbreak. 
Oikos 90(3):417–430 Reed MS, Evely AC, Cundill G, Fazey I, Glass J, Laing A, Newig J, Parrish B, Prell C, Raymond C, Stringer LC (2010) What is social learning? 
Ecol Soc 15(4). 
http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol15/iss4/resp1/ Robbins P (2004) Political ecology: a critical introduction. 
Blackwell Publishers, London Robinson J (1988) Unlearning and backcasting: rethinking some of the questions we ask about the future. 
Technol Forecast Soc Chang 33:325–338 Rockstrom J, Steffen W, Noone K, Persson A, Chapin FS, Lambin E, Lenton TM, Scheffer M, Folke C, Schellnhuber HJ, Nykvist B, De Wit CA, Hughes T, Van Der Leeuw S, Rodhe H, Sorlin S, Snyder PK, Costanza R, Svedin U, Falkenmark M, Karlberg L, Corell RW, Fabry VJ, Hansen J, Walker B, Liverman D, Richardson K, Crutzen P, Foley J (2009) A safe operating space for humanity. 
Nature 461(7263):472–475 Rodriguez JP, Beard TD, Bennett EM, Cumming GS, Cork SJ, Agard J, Dobson AP, Peterson GD (2006) Trade-offs across space, time, and ecosystem services. 
Ecol Soc 11(1):28 Rustigian HL, Santelmann MV, Schumaker NH (2003) Assessing the potential impacts of alternative landscape designs on amphibian population dynamics. 
Landscape Ecol 18(1):65–81 Sarch MT (2001) Fishing and farming at Lake Chad: institutions for access to natural resources. 
J Environ Manage 62(2): 185–199 Schultz L, Lundholm C (2010) Learning for resilience? 
Exploring learning opportunities in Biosphere Reserves. 
Environ Educ Res 16:645–663 Simon HA (1962) The architecture of complexity. 
Proc Am Philos Soc 106:467–482 Social_Learning_Group (2001) Learning to manage global environmental risks Stirling A (2007) Risk, precaution and science: towards a more constructive policy debate. 
Eur Mol Biol Organ Rep 8: 309–315 Thompson WA, Holling CS, Kira D, Huang CC, Vertinsky I (1979) Evaluation of alternative forest system management policies—case of the Spruce Budworm in New-Brunswick. 
J Environ Econ Manage 6(1):51–68 Turner MG, Gardner RH, O’Neill RV (2001) Landscape ecology in theory and practice: pattern and process. 
Springer, New York Walker B (1992) Biological diversity and ecological redundancy. 
Conserv Biol 6:18–23 Walker B, Salt D (2006) Resilience thinking: sustaining ecosystems and people in a changing world. 
Island Press, Washington, DC Walters CJ (1986) Adaptive management of renewable resources. 
McGraw Hill, New York Walters C (1997) Challenges in adaptive management of riparian and coastal ecosystems. 
Conserv Ecol [online] 1(2):1. 
Available from the Internet. 
http://www.consecol. org/vol1/iss2/art1 WCED (1987) Our common future. 
Report of the World Commission on Environment and Development (WCED). 
Oxford, pp 43–66 Westley F, Carpenter SR, Brock WA, Holling CS, Gunderson LH (2002) Why systems of people and nature are not just social and ecological systems. 
In: Gunderson LH, Holling CS (eds) Panarchy: understanding transformations in human and natural systems. 
Island Press, Washington, DC, p 103 WRI (2008) World Resources Institute (WRI) in collaboration with United Nations Development Programme, United Nations Environment Programme, and World Bank. 
World Resources 2008: roots of resilience—growing the wealth of the poor. 
WRI, Washington, DC Yachi S, Loreau M (1999) Biodiversity and ecosystem productivity in a fluctuating environment: the insurance hypothesis. 
Proc Nat Acad Sci 96:1463–1468 Zhang PC, Shao GF, Zhao G, Le Master DC, Parker GR, Dunning JB, Li QL (2000) Ecology—China’s forest policy for the 21st century. 
Science 288(5474):2135–2136 123 