1. Introduction Inquiry learning in science education is widely promoted as a pedagogical practice that encourages students to question the natural world, to ﬁnd solutions, and develop better understandings. 
Inquiry learning involves students working cooperatively to generate their own hypotheses, construct their own working theories, critically evaluate and assess the different conceptions generated, and search for new scientiﬁc information and knowledge (Veermans, Lallimo, & Hakkarainen, 2005). 
There is no doubt that children are more motivated to learn when they are encouraged to be active participants in the learning process, investigate problems that challenge their curiosity, and think creatively as they work towards commonly agreed conclusions. 
ß 2012 Elsevier Ltd. 
All rights reserved. 
§ This paper was accepted by the prior Editor-in-Chief, Karen Littleton. 
* Corresponding author. 
Tel.: +61 733763419; fax: +61 733657199. 
E-mail address: r.gillies@uq.edu.au (R.M. 
Gillies). 
0883-0355/$ – see front matter ß 2012 Elsevier Ltd. 
All rights reserved. 
Sadly, in many classrooms children are often the passive recipients of learning rather than active participants in it. While children’s curiosity is widely considered to be a natural resource for classroom inquiry, it is well recognised that the number of children who spontaneously ask and pursue questions about their own interests are relatively few in number (Zuckerman, Chudinova, & Khavkin, 1998). 
This, in part, may be due to the lack of modelling that teachers demonstrate in how to ask and answer thought-provoking questions. 
Galton, Hargreves, Comber, Wall, and Pell (1999), for example, in a study of teachers’ questioning behaviours in primary classrooms, found that children are rarely asked cognitively challenging questions where they are required to think about the issues and justify their responses. 
The channel of communication in these teachers’ classrooms tended to be one-way as the teachers talked at students who were required to listen and respond, often reiterating information provided earlier by the teacher. 
Interestingly, Chinn, O’Donnell, and Jinks (2000) reported that ﬁfth-grade science students only engage in high quality discourse when they were required to discuss reasons for their conclusions. 
In short, Zuckerman et al., Galton et al., and Chinn et al. found that the children only rarely ask cognitively challenging questions, often responding by reiterating what the teacher had previously stated. 
1.1. 
Explanatory behaviour Teaching students to engage critically and constructively with each other’s ideas, challenge and counter-challenge proposals, and discuss alternative propositions before reaching agreement are important if students are to talk and reason effectively together (Rojas-Drummond & Mercer, 2003). 
Mercer, Dawes, Wegerif, and Sams (2004) found that when students are taught to talk and reason effectively together and apply those skills in the study of science they make greater gains in measures of individual reasoning than students who have not had such teaching. 
Learning to seek and to give high-level elaborations is an important part of learning to dialogue and reason effectively together (Mercer, Wegerif, & Dawes, 1999; Rojas-Drummond & Mercer, 2003), yet research demonstrates that students need to be trained in how to provide help if such help is to be effective and learning is to occur. 
Three categories of student behaviour that are critical for promoting effective helping and learning during dialogic exchanges include: teaching help seekers to ask precise questions, persist in seeking help, and applying the explanations received. 
For help-givers, these behaviours include: learning to provide detailed explanations of the topic under discussion, helping recipients apply the help received, and monitoring the recipient’s understanding. 
Like Meloth and Deering (1999) and Galton et al. (1999), Webb and Mastergeorge (2003) found that students only give detailed explanations infrequently and that teachers need to train students to provide effective explanations as part of the process of teaching them to be responsive to other students’ requests during cooperative learning experiences. 
Discussing material and information with others helps students to clarify ideas, negotiate meaning, develop new und erstandings, and create new knowledge with such discussions having the capacity to transform how students think (Wittrock, 1990). 
However, helping children to engage in exchanges where they both give and provide explanatory help requires a concerted effort on the part of the teacher to ensure that students are taught such dialoguing skills. 
Although there are numerou s strategies designed to help children talk and reason effectively together such as reciprocal teaching (Brown & Palincsar, 1988), collaborative strategic reading (Vaughn, Klingner, & Bryant, 2001), and scripted coo peration (O’Donnell, Dansereau, & Rocklin, 1987), most are designed to promote understanding and comprehension rather than children’s higher-level complex thinking. 
Two questioning approaches that actively promote children’s higher-level thinking and reasoning are the Ask to Think-Tel Why approach (King, 1997) and the Philosophy for Children approach (Lipman, 1988). 
1.2. 
Questioning strategies In the Ask to Think-Tel Why approach (King, 1997), children are taught to ask each other a sequence of questions designed to scaffold each other’s thinking and learning to progressively higher levels. 
The advantage of this type of sequence is that it encourages children to not only focus on summarizing and elaborating information but it also helps them to ask cognitively challenging questions that encourages them to draw on previous understandings and knowledge and connect it to current information. 
In generating these types of connection questions, King (1999) maintains that the questioner needs to think about how ideas in the task relate to each other and the responder must be able to generate a response that connects the ideas together or provides rationales or explanations to justify his/her response. 
Because responders have been taught to provide elaborated responses such as explanations, justiﬁcations, and rationales to the questions they are asked, they realise the importance of explaining, justifying and rationalising how they have connected ideas and information to support their responses. 
In so doing, students often develop new ways of explaining and arguing their points as new knowledge is often generated and the quality of the discourse is enhanced. 
As partners engage in the question-asking-answering process that is typical of the interactions in the Ask to Think-Tel Why Strategy, they learn that each question posed is often highly dependent on previous responses that have been given and that these, in turn, help to shape subsequent questions. 
In this sense, partners are highly dependent on each other in these reciprocal dialogues for scaffolding and guiding each others learning. 
King maintains that this reciprocity of questioning and answering creates a transactive process where the partners are equal participants in providing mutual assistance and mutual learning; together promoting higher level thinking and complex learning. 
In the Philosophy for Children approach (Lipman, 1988), which is underpinned by a constructivist pedagogy known as the ‘Community of Inquiry’, children are taught how to work together in a cooperative learning setting, using philosophical thinking centred on dialogue and collaborative activity where they engage in critical and creative thinking, such as exploring disagreements, drawing inferences and making considered judgments in order to develop the social and intellectual dispositions and capacities needed for active citizenship, as well as independent judgment (Burgh, 2003; Cam, 2006). 
In order, though, to conduct a good inquiry, students need to organise discussion around students’ own questions that will help them to explore and analyse issues in-depth. 
This occurs when they learn to ask a range of questions such as those that help them probe alternative perspectives, explore causal connections and relationships, and pose hypothetical problems, through to those that challenge them to be more self-reﬂective and self-monitoring (Perkins et al., 2006). 
It is through the dialogic exchanges that occur that children learn to engage in reasoned argumentation that helps them to clarify their understandings and facilitate their thinking (Reznitskaya, Anderson, & Kuo, 2007). 
A meta-analysis of 18 studies that used the Philosophy for Children approach (Garcia-Moriyon, Rebollo, & Colom, 2004) found that children in the philosophy for children groups obtained higher reasoning skills than their untrained peers, outperforming their peers by an average of more than half a standard deviation. 
While there is no doubt that children’s reasoning skills are enhanced from engaging in this approach to dialoguing, no studies have documented how these skills, in turn, mediate learning; important information if this approach to teaching children to engage in reasoned argumentation is likely to be more widely adopted in schools. 
1.3. 
Role of questioning in inquiry-based science Teaching children to ask and answer questions is critically important if they are to learn to talk and reason effectively together, particularly during inquiry-based science activities where students are expected to work cooperatively on a common problem-solving task. 
By interacting with others in reciprocal dialogues, children learn to use language differently and creatively to explain new experiences and new realities and in so doing, construct new ways of thinking and learning (Mercer, 1996). 
When children are required to justify or explain their ideas to others, they are forced to cognitively reexamine and reorganise their understandings so their explanations can be readily understood, and in so doing, they often develop a better understanding of the problem than they had previously and this has a positive effect on their learning performance (Gillies, 2003; Webb, 1991; Webb & Farivar, 1999). 
Moreover, the open discussions that occur during cooperative learning provide opportunities for individuals to model thinking and problem-solving strategies (King, 1999). 
Modelling how to ask and answer questions is particularly important because Webb (1989) found that only 12–14% of statements that students made during cooperative learning provided high-level explanations in response to peers’ requests for information or assistance with a problem. 
Meloth and Deering (1992, 1994) reported similar results in their studies of talk in collaborative group interactions among elementary school students. 
These ﬁndings are a concern because Meloth and Deering (1999), Webb and Farivar (1999) and Veenman, Denessen, van den Akker, and van der Rijt (2005) reported that the cognitive and metacognitive levels of the groups’ discussions are positively correlated with students’ cognitive and metacognitive outcomes. 
In effect, task-related talk about information, concepts, strategies, and thinking is very important to students’ learning yet Meloth and Deering, Webb and Farivar, and Veenman et al. noted that high-level explanatory behaviour only emerges with low frequency when left to emerge naturally or as a by-product of cooperative learning. 
Similarly, King (1999) observed that students generally do not elaborate on information, do not ask thought-provoking questions, and do not spontaneously activate and use their relevant prior knowledge without some external guidance. 
For higher level thinking to occur during group discussions, King argued that the interaction must be structured so that students learn how to exchange ideas, explanations, justiﬁcations, speculations, inferences, hypotheses, conclusions, and other highlevel discourse known to promote peer learning. 
Likewise, Palincsar and Herrenkohl (2002) found that when students were taught to predict and theorize, summarise, and relate their predictions and theories to their ﬁndings during science, they developed better explanations about the phenomena under investigation than their untrained peers. 
In short, Meloth and Deering (1999), King, and Paliscsar and Herrenkohl found that students’ discourse is enhanced when they receive explicit guidance in how to engage in higher level thinking and reasoning activities during small group learning. 
1.4. 
Promoting high-level discourse among students Two approaches to teaching students to engage in high-level discourse are the Ask to Think-Tel Why approach (King, 1997) for scaffolding higher level complex learning and the Philosophy for Children approach (Lipman, 1988) to teaching children how to dialogue together to think constructively and to engage critically and creatively with problems at hand. 
In the Ask to Think-Tel Why approach, students are taught to generate and sequence speciﬁc strategic and meta-cognitive questions designed to promote their comprehension of the material studied, integrate that material, draw inferences from it, and remember the knowledge generated. 
Students practise these questions through structured, dyadic interactions with a peer. 
In the Philosophy for Children approach, children learn through the ‘‘community of inquiry’’. 
Inquiry begins with a problematic situation from which the students’ curiosity is aroused and thereby generating genuine questions that lead to and shape the philosophical discussion. 
Questioning is an important part of the inquiry process, not only for the students but also for the teacher who facilitates the discussion prompted by procedural and substantive questions. 
Procedural questions explore the underlying logic and structure of thinking, encourage reasoning and conceptual exploration, and model the procedure of inquiry. 
Substantive questions direct discussion in a subtle direction, draw upon and extend knowledge, and add new ideas and content. 
The purpose of both procedural and substantive questions is to assist students to learn to reason constructively together, and by implication, learn. 
As students become more experienced and skilled at inquiry, the discussion is facilitated more by the students themselves. 
While both these approaches to teaching students to ask strategic and meta-cognitive questions have demonstrated positive effects for either learning (e.g., Ask to Think-Tel Why approach) or reasoning (e.g., Philosophy for Children approach) (Garcia-Moriyon et al., 2004), neither has been examined to determine if one approach is more successful than the other in enhancing students’ explanatory behaviour, reasoning, problem-solving, and learning – key behavioural objectives of inquiry-based learning in science (Veermans et al., 2005). 
The current study builds on earlier research by Gillies (2006, 2004a,b, 2003) and Gillies and Ashman (1996, 1998) on the effects of cooperative learning on students’ behaviours, interactions, and achievements and research by Cam (1995, 1997, 2006) and Burgh, Field, and Freakley (2006) and Freakley and Burgh (2000) on the application of philosophical inquiry in the classroom to enhance students’ thinking and reasoning. 
It does this by drawing together two lines of research to investigate the effects of training students in speciﬁc, strategic and meta-cognitive questioning approaches during inquiry-based science on students’ discourse, problem-solving, and learning, aspects of learning that have not been previously investigated. 
Speciﬁcally, the study aims to: 1. determine whether training students to use speciﬁc strategic and meta-cognitive questioning strategies contributes to enhanced explanatory responses during inquiry-based science; 2. determine whether the use of these strategic and meta-cognitive questioning strategies enhances reasoning, problemsolving and learning among students; 3. determine the extent to which these strategies are maintained over the period in which the two inquiry-based science units were implemented. 
Because teachers play a critical role in mediating children’s learning, the study also sought to: 4. determine if teachers who have received training in speciﬁc strategic and metacognitive questioning approaches demonstrate more mediation strategies than their untrained peers and, if so, how do these behaviours differ? 
2. Methodology 2.1. 
Study design This is a comparative study of the effectiveness of embedding a speciﬁc cognitive questioning approach (King, 1997) or a community of inquiry approach (Lipman, 1988) into two, inquiry-based science units where students worked cooperatively in small groups on assigned tasks. 
This study involved three conditions: The cognitive questioning approach (condition 1), the community of inquiry approach (condition 2), and the comparison condition (condition 3). This design had two purposes; ﬁrst, it aimed to determine if there were differences between the cognitive questioning condition and the community of inquiry condition in students’ verbal behaviours in comparison to their untrained peers. 
Second, it also sought to determine if there were differences in the types of mediation that teachers engage in when they have been trained to implement either the cognitive questioning approach or the community of inquiry questioning approach and do these teachers differ from their untrained peers. 
2.2. 
Teachers Eighteen, grade 6 teachers from nine primary schools in Brisbane, Australia agreed to participate in the study and teach two, inquiry-based sciences units (6–10 weeks each), once a term for two school terms. 
The participating teachers varied in their teaching experiences (1–20 years) but all were highly regarded by their supervising teachers for their commitment to professional development and their willingness to try new teaching approaches in their classrooms. 
All teachers were volunteers; four were male and 14 were female which is broadly representative of the ratio of male to female teachers in primary schools in Australia. 
The teachers were randomly allocated by school to one of three conditions, the cognitive questioning approach, the community of inquiry approach, and the comparison condition. 
All school had a similar sociodemographic proﬁle. 
2.3. 
Students Three hundred and ﬁfty-two students (male = 179, female = 173; mean age = 11.16 years, SD = 5.0 months) from the above teachers’ classrooms participated in the two, inquiry-based science units that were taught as part of their regular classroom curriculum. 
However, as only two groups of students from each classroom were videotaped, complete data are only available on 35 groups. 
Students were randomly assigned by their teachers to four-person, gender-balanced, mixed-ability groups (based on students’ performances on the Middle Years Ability Test, ACER, 2005) because previous research has indicated that this grouping arrangement is more likely to promotes student interaction and learning than other gender and ability combinations (Lou et al., 1996). 
(The Middle Years Ability Test is designed to assess the general reasoning ability of students between 10 and 15 years. 
It consists of a series of items assessing verbal and numerical reasoning abilities which are independent of speciﬁc learning in speciﬁc subjects). 
A one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) (ability Â condition) was conducted to determine if there were signiﬁcant differences in ability between the conditions. 
The ANOVA was not signiﬁcant, F (2, 342) = 2.96, p = 0.53; Cognitive questioning condition ability M = 1.88, SD = 0.68, n = 95; Philosophy for children condition ability M = 1.85, SD = 0.41, n = 118; Comparison condition M = 1.72, SD = 0.52, n = 130), indicating there were no signiﬁcant differences in ability between students in the three conditions. 
2.4. 
The three conditions Teachers who participated in the study were randomly allocated by school to one of three conditions: the cognitive questioning condition (condition 1), the community of inquiry condition (condition 2), and the comparison condition (condition 3). All teachers participated in four days of professional development workshops which provided them with the background information on the inquiry-based science units that they had agreed to teach and the procedures that they needed to follow to establish cooperative learning in their classrooms. 
Teachers in the cognitive questioning condition and the community of inquiry condition received additional training in the questioning strategies they were asked to employ. 
Although the teachers in the comparison condition did not receive training in questioning strategies, they spent a similar amount of time discussing their inquiry-based science units and how they would teach these units of work. 
2.4.1. 
Inquiry-based science units The teachers taught two inquiry-based science units investigating living versus non-living things, and genetically modiﬁed food (GMF). 
The focus of the living and non-living unit was to help students to identify the differences between living and non-living things by having them explore their own pre-conceptions of what are the characteristics of living things, come to a decision on a suite of characteristics that identify living things and then apply their new found knowledge to a novel situation. 
The unit consisted of 12 lessons that were taught over 6–8 weeks which enabled students to draw upon their prior knowledge to deﬁne a living thing, generate a list of inquiry questions, explore how living things acquire energy, move, reproduce, respond to stimuli, respire, and grow and develop. 
Students were videotaped in lesson 10 when they worked in their groups (discussed below) on the problem, the Martian and the car. 
This problem involved Marty Martian who had been sent to earth by his government to ﬁnd life and while there, he had captured a car which he took back to Mars as an example of life on earth. 
The Martian government, however, did not believe that the car that Marty bought back was alive and he had to stand trial for failing to perform his Martian duties. 
The children, in their groups, were required to take the part of the defence attorney at his trial and make a sound case for the car being alive, then they were required to take the alternative position and identify why it was a non-living thing. 
Reasons were listed on paper and presented to the class where reasons provided were challenged by other children. 
The focus in the second unit (GM Foods) was on guiding students to arrive at a personal stance on whether Australia should grow genetically modiﬁed crops. 
The unit consisted of 17 lessons which were taught over 8–10 weeks, designed to enable students to understand the purposes of science, practice generating questions, learn the foundational content of the unit, synthesise new understandings and dispel misconceptions, engage in laboratory experiments designed to illustrate the processes of DNA extraction and gel electrophoresis as part of the procedures used in genetic modiﬁcation, and develop arguments for and against growing GM crops. 
All lessons involved students working in groups to investigate key ideas and topics, to share their information with others, to challenge others’ perspectives, and to present their groups’ ideas to the class where they were expected to provide reasons and justiﬁcations for their position. 
Students were videotaped during lesson 14 as they discussed the information that they had collected on the environmental, social, health and economic arguments for and against the growth of GM crops. 
The purpose of this session was to have the children agree on three or more arguments that contributed to the debate on the value or otherwise of GM crops. 
The children then prepared their oral presentation for the class which involved presenting their arguments for their stance and identifying whether they were environmental, social, health, or economic arguments that supported their position. 
At the conclusion of the unit, students completed the reﬂection activity discussed above. 
Once again, all groups were required to present their groups’ work to the class where they could be challenged to provide reasons or justiﬁcations for their position. 
2.4.2. 
Cooperative learning During the workshop, all participating teachers were introduced to the key elements required for successful cooperative learning and shown how to embed these elements into their inquiry-based science activities. 
This included ensuring that tasks were structured so that all students were required to contribute (positive interdependence), students were taught the social skills required to enhance cooperation, all students were required to contribute to the group (individual accountability), students were encouraged to contribute ideas and information and help others to do likewise, and students were encouraged to reﬂect on what they had achieved (group processing) (Johnson & Johnson, 1990). 
Additionally, teachers were asked to ensure that students understood that: all information is shared; students must work to achieve agreement; students must accept responsibility for their decisions; students are expected to provide reasons for their decisions; alternative answers are discussed before a decision is made; and, all group members are encouraged to contribute to the discussion (Mercer et al., 1999). 
In addition to the information on how to embed cooperative learning into their inquiry-based science activities, two conditions (cognitive questioning condition and community of inquiry condition) received speciﬁc information on how to promote student discourse through speciﬁc questioning techniques. 
2.4.3. 
Cognitive questioning condition Teachers in this condition were trained in how to ask good questions using the Ask-To-Think-Tel-why approach (King, 1997) (discussed previously in Sections 1.2 and 1.4). 
In generating higher-level complex thinking questions, King (1999) maintains that the questioner needs to think about how ideas in the task relate to each other and the responder must be able to generate a response that connects the ideas together or provides rationales or explanations to justify his/her response. 
Examples of such thought provoking questions include: How might . 
. 
.affect . 
. 
.? 
What are the strengths and weakness of . 
. 
.? 
What evidence is there to support your statement? 
These key question starters were printed on bookmarks and given to students to use as prompts to help them ask questions to challenge each other’s thinking. 
2.4.4. 
Community of inquiry condition Teachers in this condition used the Philosophy for Children (Lipman, 1988) approach to engage students in collaborative, inquiry-based learning. 
It is a form of ‘‘reﬂective education, in which learning to think lies at the core of educational aims and practices’’ (Cam, 2006, p. 7). Thinking is understood as a process of inquiry and emphasis is on good thinking and its improvement. 
There is also an emphasis on the classroom as a pluralistic community engaged actively in dialogue, where students learn to listen to one another, share and build on each other’s ideas, consider different opinions and perspectives, and explore disagreements. 
The community of inquiry is guided and reinforced by speciﬁc procedures and practices, of which questioning plays a large part. 
Both the students and the teacher use questions to prompt discussion and explore issues. 
Procedural question are particularly important to maintain the procedures and practices of the community of inquiry. 
Examples of such questions are: (1) questions of clariﬁcation – What do you mean by . 
. 
.?, (2) questions about viewpoints of perspectives – What would be another way of putting that?, (3) questions that probe assumptions – Do you think that assumption is warranted?, (4) questions that probe reasons and evidence – Can you give an example/counterexample to illustrate your point?, (5) questions that probe implications and consequences – What would follow from what you say?, and (6) questions about the question – Do you think that is an appropriate question? 
These kinds of questions are vital to conducting a good inquiry, which will help students develop skills in analysis and evaluation through the exploration of alternative perspectives, causal connections and relationships, ﬁnding criteria, hypothetising, and self-reﬂection and selfcorrection. 
2.4.5. 
Comparison condition Teachers in this condition were not formally trained to use a particular approach to enhancing students’ dialoguing skills as they worked in their groups, although they were asked to encourage their students to work together, exchange ideas and information and resolve conﬂicts democratically. 
As a number of teachers raised concerns about the difﬁculties of encouraging low-achieving children to engage with reading text and dialoguing together, they were provided with information on collaborative strategic reading (CSR) (Vaughn et al., 2001) as a way of helping students to participate effectively in the inquiry-based science activities. 
CSR consists of four basic strategies that are designed to enhance students’ comprehension of text. 
These strategies include learning to: make predictions prior to reading (preview strategy); monitor reading and learning to enhance vocabulary development (click and clunk strategy); identify main ideas (get-the-gist strategy); and, summarise key ideas (wrap-up strategy). 
CSR is a strategy designed to help low-achieving readers enhance their comprehension of the text under discussion. 
It is not a strategy that promotes higher-level complex thinking. 
2.5. 
Measures The three measures discussed in this section are: the students’ verbal behaviours as they worked in their small groups; the teachers’ mediating behaviours; and, the measure designed to assess the students’ reasoning and problem-solving responses to the inquiry-based science tasks. 
2.5.1. 
Students’ verbal behaviours The observation for the students’ verbal behaviours was based on a schedule originally developed by Webb (1985, 1992) and modiﬁed by Gillies (2004b) and Gillies and Khan (2008) for the purposes of this study to gather information on the types of verbal behaviours used by students during their group sessions. 
The four categories of verbal behaviour that were identiﬁed were: Interactive behaviours (i.e., gives directions to the group, afﬁrms another student’s response, afﬁrms other students’ group efforts, extends another student’s group efforts such as working hard, extends another student’s response, engages in a sustained exchange about the topic, and interrupts another student either positively or negatively); Helping behaviours (i.e., gives unprompted short response, gives short response on request, makes a statement on the topic); Questioning behaviours (i.e., asks questions to stimulate, clarify, or recall discussion, elicit factual information, or promote thinking); and Problem-solving behaviours (i.e., suggestion on how to solve the problem, suggests an idea, plan or experiment to explore a concept, or provide an analogy to amplify a concept). 
Students’ verbal behaviours were coded accorded to frequency across each of two recorded group sessions and represent 100% of students’ group discussion during each session. 
Two coders, one blind to the purposes of the study, coded a common three hours of videotape (videotapes were randomly chosen from the three conditions) and inter-rater reliability ranged from 93% to 100% for the four categories coded. 
A total of 70 hours of students’ verbal behaviours (i.e., 35 groups for one hour each) across two time periods (i.e., one hour for each of two units of work) was collected. 
2.5.2. 
Teachers’ mediating behaviours The observation of the teachers’ mediating behaviours was originally developed by Gillies and Boyle (2006) and modiﬁed for the purposes of this study based on preliminary trialling of the categories in classrooms where teachers used cooperative learning and inquiry-based learning approaches in their teaching (Gillies & Khan, 2008). 
The schedule identiﬁed 10 types of teacher mediating behaviours that were collapsed into two categories of mediation: Basic mediation and extended mediation. 
Basic mediation included such behaviours as: giving instruction or lectures, asking questions requiring minimal responses, asking open-questions, paraphrasing student responses to provide clarity, and providing help to students such as making suggestions or providing examples. 
Extended mediation included such behaviours as: probing students’ ideas, knowledge, and assumptions; seeking clariﬁcation of ideas; encouraging students to identify similar examples, ideas or analogies; prompting students to expand on ideas and/or provide reasons; and, providing extended indirect help by asking a sequence of questions designed to help students consolidate their understandings. 
While 18 teachers were involved in the study, only 23 hours of teacher audiotapes were collected across the two time periods (one hour per each inquiry-based science unit; Time 1: ﬁve teachers in each condition; Time 2: three teachers in conditions 1 and 2, and two in condition 3). Teacher illness, timetable constraints, and equipment difﬁculties contributed to not being able to record all teachers at each time period). 
The same raters, mentioned previously, coded a common three hours of audiotape and inter-rater agreement ranged from 95 to 100% agreement for the categories coded. 
2.5.3. 
Reasoning and problem-solving measures Both inquiry-based science units were organised so that each lesson raised a key question and a series of smaller questions that challenged the children to think about the topic and use the resources available to arrive at an answer. 
The lessons often began with the teacher presenting a stimulus topic (e.g., ‘‘We’re off to look for aliens’’) that challenged the children to think about what characteristics living things (in this case aliens) have, the use of different characteristics (e.g., wings, teeth, eyes, etc.), and whether all living things would have these characteristics. 
The purpose of this activity is not to arrive at a deﬁnite answer but, rather, to encourage the children to think as scientists do to examine each idea to check its validity. 
Each inquiry-based science unit was followed-up by asking the students to respond individually to a reasoning and problem-solving task that was designed to assess the extent to which they were making connections and building understandings between information presented and discussed during their inquiry-based science activities. 
The criteria used to assess each follow-up activity was informed by Anderson et al. (2001) revision taxonomy of educational objectives that illustrates the relationship between complex kinds of knowledge and cognitive processes and King’s (1997) approach to helping students ask questions to scaffold higher-level complex thinking in their peers. 
The ﬁrst reasoning and problem-solving task (compare and contrast), which was used as a follow-up to the living versus non-living inquiry-based science unit, required children to: provide examples of living, non-living things, and dead things, to identify the common characteristics of living and non-living things, to write an important statement about the relationship between living and dead things and provide an example, and to develop a sequence of questions that they would ask to determine whether a new species that has just been discovered is living, non-living, or dead. 
Students’ responses to this problem-solving task were evaluated on the basis of the highest level knowledge response they were able to generate and the cognitive processes demonstrated (Krathwohl, 2002). 
For example, on the compare and contrast organiser, the dimensions of knowledge covered included: recalling basis facts, understanding the inter-relationships between different living and non-living things, connecting more complex information and ideas, and thinking about generating additional information based on connecting new ideas and constructing new knowledge such as generating questions to seek more information relevant to the problem. 
The cognitive processes involved in each dimension of knowledge covered a range of actions including being able to remember, understand, apply, analyse, evaluate, and create; hence, the cognitive processes demonstrated depended on the problem the children were asked to solve. 
The second reasoning and problem-solving task, which the children were required to complete after the inquiry-science unit on genetically modiﬁed (GM) food, asked them to deﬁne biotechnology and provide some examples; explain genetic modiﬁcation and provide examples; imagine that they had to create a frost resistant tomato and then record how they would separate the DNA to make a new gene that was resistant to frost; identify some questions they would ask a group of scientists to clarify their understandings of growing GM foods; and, ﬁnally write their recommendations to the government regarding the use of this technology. 
The two reasoning and problem-solving tasks were developed by the researchers and checked for authenticity by a middle-years science teacher and a supervising teacher in one of the schools. 
Both conﬁrmed that they were valid representations of the types of tasks the children had been working on in their groups where they had been required to solve complex, real-life problems that tested their capacities to think (Herrington & Oliver, 2000). 
Students responses to these reasoning and problem-solving tasks were evaluated on the basis of the highest level knowledge response they were able to generate and the processes demonstrated (Krathwohl, 2002). 
For example, on the compare and contrast organiser, students received a score of one if they were able to give examples of living, non-living, and dead things because this response was located at the knowledge review level. 
In contrast, students received a score of ﬁve if they were able to identify some questions they would ask to determine if a new species was living, non-living, or dead. 
This response required students to think about their thinking, coalesce their knowledge and understandings to think metacognitively about the topic. 
Similarly, with the GM foods, students received a score of one if they could deﬁne and provide examples of biotechnology (a topic they had been investigating), a score of three required them to connect information to develop more complex understandings while a score of ﬁve required them to integrate their knowledge and understandings on the issues of GM foods and write 3–6 recommendations to government on the use of this technology. 
The advantage of using this type of assessment tool is that based on the work the children had been studying, it enabled teachers to: see how the children responded to the intellectual challenge the activity posed, assess students’ higher-order thinking and, identify the support that would be needed by speciﬁc students as necessary (Woolfolk, 1998). 
Additionally, this type of assessment tool provides teachers with a wealth of information on students’ performances without the requirements for formal testing (Herrington & Oliver, 2000). 
2.6. 
Procedure The preliminary testing, the inquiry-based science units, and the data collection process were discussed with teachers prior to the commencement of the study. 
All teachers participated in an initial two-day workshop which provided them with information on how to embed cooperative learning into the ﬁrst inquiry-based science unit (living and non-living things). 
Teachers in the cognitive questioning condition received information on how to use the Ask To Think-Tel Why approach (King, 1997) to help students to engage in reciprocal questioning while teachers in the community of inquiry condition received information speciﬁcally on how to use the Philosophy for Children approach to help students to formulate and ask open-ended questions that will readily lead to intellectual inquiry. 
Teachers in the comparison condition did not receive training in using any speciﬁc questioning approach although they were given a handout on collaborative strategic reading (Vaughn et al., 2001) to help students engage with text. 
A follow-up two-day workshop was provided before teachers implemented the second inquirybased science unit to provide them with information on the unit they were to teach and to ensure that they had the resources needed to do so. In this study, all teachers received four days of professional training: a two-day initial workshop and a followup two day workshop. 
Gillies and Khan (2008, 2009) have used similar two-day workshops and found that they gave the teachers time to address issues of concern about implementing the pedagogical intervention. 
Two groups of students (4 students per group) were videotaped for a full hour; one during each inquiry-based science unit. 
This occurred in lesson 10 in the ﬁrst unit and in lesson 14 during the second unit to ensure that all groups were discussing the same topic. 
While the two small groups in each classroom were being videotaped simultaneously, the teacher in the same classroom was being audiotaped to capture the dialogues that he/she engaged in as they interacted with students in the groups that were not being videotaped. 
3. Results 3.1. 
Statistical analysis The overall effect of the intervention on the students’ and teachers’ verbal behaviours over the three conditions at the two time points was evaluated using Kruskal–Wallis Tests. 
The Kruskal–Wallis Test which is used when the data sets are small allows for between-groups effects to be identiﬁed. 
When signiﬁcant differences were identiﬁed between the conditions, follow-up Mann–Whitney U Tests were conducted in order to describe the direction of the differences. 
The data for the students reasoning and problem-solving (RP-S) scores which were collected at the two time points were regarded as nested within schools and therefore non-independent (Goldstein, 2005) so a multilevel regression model was used with the RP-S scores at Time 1 as the covariate to test for differences between the three conditions. 
3.2. 
Students’ verbal behaviours In order to determine if there were differences in the students’ verbal behaviours between the conditions at Time 1, four Kruskal–Wallis Tests were conducted on the frequency of recorded verbal interactions for the children in the different conditions. 
The results showed that there was a signiﬁcant difference between the conditions in questioning behaviour, X 2 (2, N = 35) = 8.88, p = 0.01) but not in the other verbal behaviours (Interactive behaviours, X 2 (2, N = 35) = 5.43, p = 0.06; Helping behaviours, X 2 (2, N = 35) = 3.58, p = 0.16; and Problem-solving behaviours, X 2 (2, N = 35) = 3.83, p = 0.15). 
Follow-up Mann–Whitney U Tests revealed there were signiﬁcant differences in questioning behaviour (i.e., more frequent use of questions) between the cognitive questioning condition (Md = 14, n = 10) and the community of inquiry condition (Md = 4.50, n = 12), U = 17.00, z = À2.85, p = 0.004, and the cognitive questioning condition (Md = 14, n = 10) and the comparison condition (Md = 8.00, n = 13), U = 32.50, z = À2.03, p = 0.04, but not between the Philosophy for Children Condition (Md = 4.50, n = 12) and the comparison condition (Md = 8.00, n = 13), U = 56.50, z = À1.17, p = 0.24. 
The results showed that the children in the Cognitive Condition asked signiﬁcantly more questions than their peers in the other two conditions at Time 1. In order to determine if there were differences in the frequency of recorded verbal behaviours between the conditions at Time 2, four Kruskal–Wallis Tests were conducted and the results showed that there were no signiﬁcant differences between the conditions in Interactive behaviour, X 2 (2, N = 31) = 0.44, p = 0.8, Helping behaviours, X 2 (2, N = 31) = 2.56, p = 0.27, Questioning behaviours, X 2 (2, N = 31) = 1.08, p = 0.60 and, Problem-solving behaviours, X 2 (2, N = 31) = 1.30, p = 0.52. 
The results show that there were no signiﬁcant differences in the children’s recorded verbal behaviours at Time 2. 3.3. 
Teachers’ mediating behaviours In order to determine if teachers who had received training in speciﬁc questioning approaches demonstrate more mediation strategies than their untrained peers, four Kruskal–Wallis Tests were conducted and the results showed that there were no signiﬁcant differences between the three conditions in basic mediation behaviours (X 2 (2, N = 15) = 0.23, p = 0.89) and extended mediation behaviours (X 2 (2, N = 15) = 0.04, p = 0.97) at Time 1 and between basic mediation behaviours (X 2 (2, N = 8) = 2.12, p = 0.34) and extended mediation behaviours (X 2 (2, N = 8) = 2.72, p = 0.25) at Time 2. In order, though, to determine if there were differences in the types of mediating behaviours that the teachers used at the two points in time, two Wilcoxon Signed Rank Tests were conducted and the results showed that while there was no signiﬁcant difference between basic mediation at Time 1 (M = 41.40, SD = 14.57) and Time 2 (M = 63.12, SD = 26.49), z = À1.86, p = 0.06, there was a signiﬁcant difference for extended mediation between Time 1 (M = 10.33, SD = 5.49) and Time 2 (M = 27.12, SD = 15.02), z = À2.12, p = 0.03 with the teachers demonstrating nearly three times more extended mediation than they did at Time 1. 3.3.1. 
Examples of a teacher’s mediating behaviours The following two vignettes are provided in order to elucidate how one teacher’s mediating behaviours changed from Time 1 to Time 2 as he interacted with groups of students in his class. 
In the ﬁrst vignette, the teacher, is discussing Marty, the Martian – an activity in the Living and Non-living inquiry-based science unit. 
This lesson is the culmination of a number of lessons that have involved the children in learning about the characteristics of living things such as how they acquire and use energy, move, respirate, reproduce, respond to stimuli, and grow. 
In this lesson, the children have to draw on this background knowledge and their understandings to determine if Marty’s car, which he brought back to Mars from Earth, is a living thing or not and if not, why it is not a living thing. 
The plot to the story is that Marty has been accused by the Martian authorities of not bringing back a living thing so he must go to court to justify why he believes the car is alive. 
Vignette 1 1. T. What’s the defense attorney going to do for Marty, the Martian. 
What’s his job going to be? 
You need to think of some reasons why Marty thought he had done the right thing. 
You need to think of some reasons. 
2. S. Respirate. 
3. T. If you put down just respirate that’s not a good answer. 
You need to think of some reasons. 
Like, ‘‘That car was good because. 
. 
.’’. 
Teacher and students then discuss the background to the story and clarify unknown words (e.g., attorney) and how to set up the group roles. 
4. S. What’s locomotion? 
5. T. Well, locomotion is basically movement. 
. 
.Can you name some things that are non-living that move? 
(T. challenges students) 6. S. Robot. 
. 
.they’re programmed. 
7. T. Yes, I’ll let you write down what you think. 
. 
.try and get some examples to help you. 
Living and non-living things can move but it’s the way they move. 
8. S. Cars use oxygen (S. identiﬁes another characteristic of living things) 9. T. Yes, that’s a burned fuel and cars do need oxygen. 
That’s correct. 
(T. provides answer) 10. S. Would a motor be like a brain for it (car) like we have?. 
. 
.It controls it? 
11. T. What do you think? 
Does the motor control the car? 
(T. asks IRF question) 12. S. The motor produce the energy for the car. 
13. T. The motor produces the energy for it to move but it doesn’t tell it where to go. 14. S. The car is living because it breathes in oxygen and produces carbon dioxide. 
. 
. 
that’s right? 
15. T. What happens when you cut off oxygen? 
(T asks IRF question) 16. S. It dies. 
Students continue to discuss and write down the characteristics of living things. 
NB: IRF = initiation response feedback questions (Rojas-Drummond & Mercer, 2003) In the vignette above the teacher begins by asking some IRF (Initiation Response Feedback) questions which are designed to focus the children’s attention on the key players in the story (Turn 1). In Turn 3 the teacher reminds the children that they are not just to put down some answers but are to focus on providing reasons and he gives an example of how to frame their response so they do. It is interesting to note that many of the interactions that the teacher engages in consist of either providing information to students (Turns 7, 9, 13) or asking an IRF question (Turns 5, 10, 11). 
In short, there is very little mediation occurring as the teacher is focused on providing information or eliciting unelaborated answers. 
In contrast, in the second vignette a different type of interactional pattern is evident as the teacher is helping the students to identify the arguments for and against the use of genetically modiﬁed foods (GM). 
In this task, the students are working in groups to identify the environmental, social, economic, and health arguments for or against the use of GM foods. 
Vignette 2 1. S. It could grow in like. 
. 
.deserts? 
2. T. Yep! 
So you’re into using all the fertile lands. 
What could that come under? 
(T asks IRF question) 3. S. Economic 4. T. How could it be economic? 
(T. challenges student to provide reason) 5. S. It could use the deserts to grow in – use more land and not waste it. 6. S. It could be social? 
(Student suggests another beneﬁt) 7. T. OK! 
You’re arguing that they should do it so they can do grow it in drier areas? 
8. S. Economic because you can grow it in larger areas of crops. 
Use the desert land. 
9. T. Yes. 
Australia has little land suitable for growing crops. 
Why should we grow GM crops? 
What could be good about it? 
How could it help us? 
(T. challenges the students to identify some reasons) 10. S. Socially! 
11. T. What could be good about that? 
(T. prompts students to think of some positive reasons) 12. S. It gives more land to people to live on and work. 
13. T. Yes, it creates jobs for people (T. acknowledges and validates student’s point) 14. S. It can help us with allegies. 
15. T. Which heading would that come under? 
(T. prompts student to categorise information) 16. S. Health. 
It keeps us from getting sick and going to the doctor. 
17. S. Uses less water (i.e., GM foods). 
18. T. How could that help us? 
(T. challenges students) 19. S. The crops don’t need as much water so we save it for ourselves or other crops. 
20. S. That’s economic ‘cause we’re not paying for the water. 
In the vignette above, the teacher does not provide information to students as he did in the ﬁrst vignette but he challenges the students to provide reasons (Turns 4, 9, and 18). 
It is interesting to note that when he does this that on two occasions, the students respond with explanations and reasons to justify their answers (Turns 5 and 19). 
Similarly when he prompts students (Turns 11 and 15), they, in turn, respond with extended explanations (Turns 12 and 16). 
In this vignette, Murray is using more extended mediation, or verbal behaviours that prompt and challenge students to think and provide reasons for their responses than he did in the ﬁrst vignette where he asked more IRF questions or provided answers to students’ questions. 
He also demonstrates a willingness to acknowledge and validate (Turn 13) a suggestion made by a student (Turn 12) on the beneﬁts of wider land use for GM crops. 
Acknowledging and validating students’ suggestions are important if students’ are to stay engaged with the task. 
3.4. 
Students’ reasoning and problem-solving (RP-S) In order to determine if students’ reasoning and problem-solving (RP-S) scores were affected by the intervention, a multilevel regression model was used to examine the effect of the intervention on students’ scores at Time 2. The Time 1 RP-S scores were included as an independent variable in the model to control for a student’s baseline score. 
As the design of the data was nested with students selected within schools and the condition intervention allocated at school level, the model includes variance components (VC) for both between-school and within-school variation. 
Table 1 shows that there was no signiﬁcant variation among schools (VC = 0.009, SE = 0.042) but there was a signiﬁcant positive association between the RP-S scores at Time 2 (b = 0.283, SE = 0.083) and the RP-S scores at Time 1 indicating that it is important to control for students’ baseline scores. 
On examining the effect of the intervention on students RP-S scores, there were signiﬁcant differences between condition 1 and condition 2 (p < 0.001) and condition 1 and condition 3 (p < 0.001). 
There was also a signiﬁcant difference between condition 3 and condition 2 (z = À3.91, p < 0.001) with the effect of the intervention being lower for condition 2 compared to condition 1, and lower for condition 3 compared to condition 2. The effect of condition on RP-S scores was À0.45 less for condition 2 and À1.23 less for condition 3 than for condition 1 (the mean and standard deviation RP-S scores were: Condition 1 M = 4.06, SD = 0.93; Condition 2 M = 3.35, SD = 0.87; Condition 3 M = 2.23, SD = 1.27). 
Ability level also affected performance on the RP-S task with an increase of 0.52 (p < 0.01) associated with ability level 2 (middle 30% ability level) and an increase of 1.23 (p < 0.001) associated with ability level 3 (highest 30% ability level) over ability level 1 (lowest 30% ability level). 
In short, students in the cognitive questioning condition obtained higher RP-S scores than their peers in the other two conditions while students in the community of inquiry condition obtained higher scores than their peers in the comparison condition. 
4. Discussion The current study investigated the effects of training teachers in speciﬁc, strategic and meta-cognitive questioning approaches during inquiry-based science on students’ discourse, problem-solving, and learning, aspects of learning that have not been previously investigated. 
Speciﬁcally, the study had four aims. 
First, it sought to determine whether training students to use speciﬁc strategic and meta-cognitive questioning strategies (i.e., cognitive questioning or community of inquiry) contributes to enhanced explanatory responses during inquiry-based science. 
Second, it investigated whether the use of these strategic and meta-cognitive questioning strategies enhances reasoning, problem-solving and learning among students. 
Thirdly, it investigated the extent to which these strategies are maintained over time. 
Finally, it sought to determine whether teachers who had received training in these speciﬁc strategic and metacognitive questioning strategies demonstrate more mediation strategies than their untrained peers, and, if so, how do they differ. 
The study was conducted across two school terms in which one, inquiry-based science unit that involved students working cooperatively on assigned tasks was taught for 6–10 weeks each term. 
Three groups of teachers and their students participated in the study: The cognitive questioning condition (used the Ask To Think-Tel Why questioning approach), the community of inquiry condition (used the Philosophy for Children approach), and the comparison condition (no formal training in questioning). 
The results show that there were no signiﬁcant differences between the students’ verbal behaviours in the three conditions at the two points in time of the study. 
This was somewhat surprising, given that the teachers of students in the cognitive questioning condition and the community of inquiry condition had been trained in speciﬁc cognitive and metacognitive questioning strategies designed to enhance students’ cognitive and metacognitive thinking. 
One possible explanation for this outcome is that both cooperative learning and inquiry learning place an emphasis on teaching students to be responsive to other students’ questions and to provide explanations and justiﬁcations for their own responses. 
In this study, the teachers in all three conditions received information on how to establish cooperative learning to ensure that all students understood that they were required to contribute ideas and information and to help others to do likewise (Johnson & Johnson, 1990). 
All teachers also received information on how to encourage students to engage in exploratory talk (Mercer et al., 1999) by ensuring that students understood that they were expected to share information, work to achieve agreement, share responsibility for their decisions, and provide reasons for their decisions. 
In short, there was an expectation that all students would contribute to the discussions and explain their thinking. 
Additionally, each inquiry-based science unit had a list of questions embedded in it that the teachers encouraged the students to use as part of the inquiry process. 
For example, in the Living and Non-Living unit, students were asked to determine what characterises a living thing. 
This activity involved students indicating whether they thought things (e.g., robot, feather, ice, ﬁre) were living or non-living, why they thought so, and the possible characteristics of living things. 
This task required the children to identify those things that deﬁnitely were living, possibly living, and deﬁnitely not living and to justify their answers. 
Similarly, in the unit on GM Foods, students studied a topic that dealt with science through the ages in which they were asked to comment on different discoveries (e.g., invention of the steam engine), present and identify the positives and negatives of each, and then synthesise this information to pose a series of questions on the technology presented. 
In short, the students were not seeking speciﬁc answers but were, rather, learning to think as scientists think and ask questions that encourage further discussion on the topic at hand. 
The purpose was to demonstrate that it is through scientiﬁc inquiry and investigation that students realise that answers to problems do not readily appear nor can they be found by quick reference Table 1 Fixed estimates and variance components from multilevel regression of students’ reasoning and problem-solving (RP-S) scores post intervention conditions. 
Covariates b SE 95% CI Intercept 2.470*** 0.328 1.835, 3.120 RP-S pre-intervention 0.283** 0.083 0.121, 0.444 Ability 1 (reference) – – Ability 2 0.528** 0.186 0.163, 0.893 Ability 3 1.235*** 0.332 0.584, 1.886 Condition 1 (reference) – – Condition 2 À0.454*** 0.214 À0.874, 0.034 Condition 3 À1.244*** 0.236 À1.707, À0.782 Variance components Between School 0.009 0.042 Within School 0.959 0.100 b: regression coefﬁcient; SE: standard error; CI: conﬁdence interval. Levels of signiﬁcance: *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001. to authority but, rather, are solved through hard work and thinking (Roth & Bowen, 1995; Trowbridge et al., 2004). 
In short, in both the inquiry-based science units, students were required to demonstrate their thinking by stating out loud what their thoughts were on different topics, provide reasons and justiﬁcations for their answers, and challenge others’ ideas and opinions. 
These requirements, coupled with the expectation that when they worked together, they would contribute to the discussion and provide reasons for their answers seems to have sensitised the students in all conditions to provide responses that were detailed and explanatory as they worked on the inquiry-based science activities. 
Certainly, research indicates that when students are explicitly taught how to provide reasons for their explanations, they are able to produce signiﬁcantly more and better arguments and their arguments are more cohesive and precise than those generated by their comparison peers (Rojas-Drummond & Zapata, 2004; Weg erif, Linares, RojasDrummond, Mercer, & Velez, 2005). 
Gillies and Khan (2008, 2009) found that teachers must teach children how to ask and answer thought-provoking questions if they, in turn, are to engage in reasoned argumentation, problem-solving and learning. 
The reasoning and problem-solving (RP-S) measure that the children completed at the conclusion of each inquiry-based science unit was designed to determine how they were building understandings, making connections, and engaging in higher-level thinking about the information presented during their small group discussions, behaviours that Hmelo-Silver (2004) argues are critically important for fostering deep and meaningful learning. 
Interestingly, although there were no signiﬁcant differences in the explanatory behaviours of the children in the three conditions at the two time points, there were clear differences in the RP-S scores with the children in the cognitive questioning condition obtaining higher scores than their peers in the community of inquiry condition who, in turn, obtained higher scores than the children in the comparison condition. 
These differences may, in part, be attributed to the total verbal activity (i.e., the total of the interactive, helping, questioning, and problem-solving behaviours) of the children in the three conditions at Time 1 and Time 2. For example, the children in the cognitive questioning condition were signiﬁcantly more verbally interactive at Time 1, X 2 (2, N = 35) = 6.90, p = 0.03, Md = 79, n = 10, than their peers in the community of inquiry condition (Md = 37, n = 12) and the comparison condition (Md = 62, n = 13). 
Similarly, at Time 2, although there were no signiﬁcant differences between the conditions, X 2 (2, N = 31) = 0.56, p = 0.75, the children in the cognitive questioning condition were again more verbally interactive (Md = 55.5, n = 10) than their peers in the community of inquiry condition (Md = 30.00, n = 8) but not the children in the comparison condition (Md = 60.5, n = 13). 
Given that explanatory behaviour is closely associated with reasoning, problem-solving, and learning (Hmelo-Silver & Barrows, 2008; Webb, 2009), it may be the frequency with which the children in the cognitive questioning condition demonstrated this behaviour that contributed to their higher scores on the RP-S measures. 
Certainly, Cohen and her colleagues (Cohen, 1994; Cohen, Lotan, Abram, Scarloss, & Schultz, 2002; Cohen, Lotan, Scarloss, & Arellano, 1999) have consistently found that it is the frequency of task-related interactions that is related to conceptual and achievements gains in mathematics, writing, and science and these results are consistent regardless of whether the unit of analysis is the individual or the percentage of students who are observed working together in the classroom. 
In short, it may have been the frequency of the task-related interactions that occurred in the cognitive questioning condition that contributed to their higher scores on the follow-up RP-S measures. 
Given the critical role that teachers play in mediating children’s learning (Rojas-Drummond & Mercer, 2003; Webb, 2009), the study also sought to determine if teachers, who had received training in speciﬁc cognitive and metacognitive questioning strategies, demonstrated more mediation strategies than their untrained peers and, if so, how did they differ? 
The results showed that there were no differences between teachers’ basic mediation and extended mediation behaviours across the three conditions at the two points in time. 
However, there was a difference in the teachers’ use of extended mediation from Time 1 to Time 2 with the teachers in all conditions using more extended mediation to promote students’ learning. 
This may have occurred because all teachers were aware of the importance of encouraging students to dialogue with each other; indeed all had been trained to implement cooperative learning in their classes and to use Exploratory Tal k (Mercer et al., 1999) as a means of promoting small group discussions where children learn to ask questions and justify their responses. 
Moreover, the inquiry-based science units required the teachers to work with the children to generate questions that challenged students’ ideas, knowledge, and assumptions to connect information and build understandings. 
Veenman et al. (2005) and Gillies and Khan (2008, 2009) found that teachers can be taught to challenge children’s cognitive and metacognitive thinking during cooperative learning while students, in turn, provide more elaborations, reasons, and justiﬁcations for their responses. 
Teacher intervention in providing guidance in how to interact during coo perative group activities appears to be critical to helping students understand the importance of engaging in higherlev el thinking. 
4.1. 
Limitations There are three limitations to this study. 
First, teachers volunteered to participate in the study limiting the generalisations that can be made about teachers’ willingness to implement the cooperative, inquiry-based science units on which this study is based in their classrooms. 
Secondly, there were only two observations of both the students’ and teachers’ verbal behaviours, limiting the opportunity to see changes that may have occurred over time. 
Finally, no data were collected on teachers’ implementation of the speciﬁc cognitive questioning strategy (Ask to Think-Tel Why) or the Philosophy for Children (Community of inquiry condition) approach to questioning. 
5. Conclusion and implications The study shows that teaching students to ask and answer questions is critically important if students, in turn, are to engage in reasoned argumentation, problem-solving, and learning during cooperative, inquiry-based science. 
While there were no signiﬁcant differences in the children’s explanatory behaviour at the two observation periods, there were marked differences in the total verbal interactions of the children in the cognitive questioning condition and their peers in the community of inquiry and comparison conditions. 
The children in the cognitive questioning condition also obtained higher reasoning and problem-solving scores than their peers in the other conditions. 
Interestingly, although there were no signiﬁcant differences between the teachers’ basic and extended mediation behaviours in the three conditions at Times 1 and 2, the teachers did demonstrate signiﬁcantly more extended mediation behaviours between the two time periods. 
This may have occurred because, ﬁrstly, there was an expectation that the students were to dialogue together and explain their reasoning, and secondly, the inquiry-based science units required the teachers to work with the children to generate questions that challenged their ideas, knowledge and assumptions to connect information and build understandings. 
Teacher intervention in providing guidance in how to interact during cooperative, inquiry-based science appears to be critical to helping students engage in higher-level thinking and learning. 
Acknowledgement This research was funded by a Discovery Grant from the Australian Research Council. 
References Anderson, L., Krathwohl, D., Airasian, P., Cruikshank, K., Mayer, R., Pintrich, P., et al. (2001). 
A taxonomy for learning, teaching, and assessing: A revision of Bloom’s taxonomy of educational objectives. 
New York: Longman. 
Australian Council for Educational Research (ACER). 
(2005). 
Middle Years Ability Test (MYAT). 
Victoria: ACER. 
Brown, A., & Palincsar, A. (1988). 
Guided, cooperative learning and individual knowledge acquisition. 
In L. Resnick (Ed.), Cognition and instruction: Issues and agendas. 
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Burgh, G. (2003). 
Democratic education: Aligning curriculum, pedagogy, assessment and school governance. 
In P. Cam (Ed.), Philosophy, democracy and education (pp. 
102–120). 
Seoul, Korea: Korean National Commission for UNESCO. 
Burgh, G., Field, T., & Freakley, M. (2006). 
Ethics and the community of inquiry: Education for deliberative democracy. 
Southbank, Victoria: Thomson Social Sciences Press. 
Cam, P. (1995). 
Thinking together: Philosophical inquiry for the classroom. 
Sydney: Hale & Iremonger. 
Cam, P. (Ed.). (1997). 
Thinking stories 3: Philosophical inquiry for children. 
Sydney: Hale & Iremonger. 
Cam, P. (2006). 
20 thinking tools: Collaborative inquiry for the classroom. 
Camberwell, Victoria: ACER. 
Chinn, C., O’Donnell, A., & Jinks, T. (2000). 
The structure of discourse in collaborative learning. 
The Journal of Experimental Education, 69, 77–89. 
Cohen, E. (1994). 
Restructuring the classroom: Conditions for productive small groups. 
Review of Educational Research, 64, 1–35. 
Cohen, E., Lotan, R., Abram, P., Scarloss, B., & Schultz, S. (2002). 
Can groups learn? 
Teachers’ College Record, 104, 1045–1068. 
Cohen, E., Lotan, R., Scarloss, B., & Arellano, A. (1999). 
Complex instruction: Equity in cooperative learning classrooms. 
Theory into Practice, 38, 80–86. 
Freakley, M., & Burgh, G. (Eds.). (2000). 
Engaging with ethics: Ethical inquiry for teachers. 
Katoomba, NSW: Social Science Press. 
Galton, M., Hargreves, L., Comber, C., Wall, D., & Pell, T. (1999). 
Changes in patterns of teacher interaction in primary classrooms: 1976–1996. 
British Educational Research Journal, 25, 23–37. 
Garcia-Moriyon, F., Rebollo, I., & Colom, R. (2004). 
Evaluating philosophy for children: A meta-analysis. 
Thinking: The Journal of Philosophy for Children, 17(4), 14– 22. Gillies, R. (2003). 
The behaviours, interactions, and perceptions of junior high school students during small-group learning. 
Journal of Educational Psychology, 95, 137–147. 
Gillies, R. (2004a). 
The effects of cooperative learning on junior high school students during small group learning. 
Learning and Instruction, 14, 197–213. 
Gillies, R. (2004b). 
The effects of communication training on teachers’ and students’ verbal behaviours during cooperative learning. 
International Journal of Educational Research, 41, 257–279. 
Gillies, R. (2006). 
Teachers’ and students’ verbal behaviours during cooperative and small-group learning. 
British Journal of Educational Psychology, 76, 271–287. 
Gillies, R., & Ashman, A. (1996). 
Teaching collaborative skills to primary school children in classroom-based work groups. 
Learning and Instruction, 6, 187– 200. 
Gillies, R., & Ashman, A. (1998). 
Behavior and interactions of children in cooperative groups in lower and middle elementary grades. 
Journal of Educational Psychology, 90, 746–757. 
Gillies, R., & Boyle, M. (2006). 
Ten Australian elementary teachers’ discourse and reported pedagogical practices during cooperative learning. 
The Elementary Journal, 106(5), 429–451. 
Gillies, R., & Khan, A. (2008). 
The effects of teacher discourse on students’ discourse, problem-solving and reasoning during cooperative learning. 
International Journal of Educational Research, 47, 323–340. 
Gillies, R., & Khan, A. (2009). 
Promoting reasoned argumentation, problem-solving and learning during small-group work. 
Cambridge Journal of Education, 39, 7– 27. Goldstein, H. (2005). 
Multilevel statistical models (3rd ed.). 
London: Arnold, Holder Headline Group. 
Herrington, J., & Oliver, R. (2000). 
An instructional design framework for authentic learning environments. 
Educational Technology, Research and Development, 48, 23–48. 
Hmelo-Silver, C. (2004). 
Problem-based learning: What and how do students learn? 
Educational Psychology Review, 1, 235–266. 
Hmelo-Silver, C., & Barrows, H. (2008). 
Facilitating collaborative knowledge building. 
Cognition and Instruction, 26, 48–94. 
Johnson, D., & Johnson, R. (1990). 
Cooperative learning and achievement. 
In S. Sharan (Ed.), Cooperative learning: Theory and research (pp. 
23–37). 
New York: Praeger. 
King, A. (1997). 
Ask to think-tel why: A model of transactive peer tutoring for scaffolding higher level complex learning. 
Educational Psychologist, 32, 221–235. 
King, A. (1999). 
Discourse patterns for mediating peer learning. 
In A. O’Donnell & A. King (Eds.), Cognitive perspectives on peer learning (pp. 
87–116). 
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Krathwohl, D. (2002). 
A revision of Bloom’s taxonomy: An overview. 
Theory into Practice, 41, 212–218. 
Lipman, M. (1988). 
Philosophy goes to school. 
Philadelphia: Temple University Press. 
Lou, Y., Abrami, P., Spence, J., Poulsen, C., Chambers, B., & d’Apollonia, S. (1996). 
Within-class grouping: A meta-analysis. 
Review of Educational Research, 66, 423– 458. 
Meloth, M., & Deering, P. (1992). 
The effects of two cooperative conditions on peer-group discussions, reading comprehension, and metacognition. 
Contemporary Educational Psychology, 17, 175–193. 
Meloth, M., & Deering, P. (1994). 
Task talk and task awareness under different cooperative learning conditions. 
American Educational Research Journal, 31, 138–165. 
Meloth, M., & Deering, P. (1999). 
The role of the teacher in promoting cognitive processing during collaborative learning. 
In A. O’Donnell & A. King (Eds.), Cognitive perspectives on peer learning (pp. 
235–255). 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Mercer, N. (1996). 
The quality of talk in children’collaborative activity in the classroom. 
Learning and Instruction, 6, 359–377. 
Mercer, N., Dawes, L., Wegerif, R., & Sams, C. (2004). 
Reasoning as a scientist: Ways of helping children to use language to learn science. 
British Educational Research Journal, 30, 359–377. 
Mercer, N., Wegerif, R., & Dawes, L. (1999). 
Children’s talk and the development of reasoning in the classroom. 
British Educational Research Journal, 25, 95–111. 
O’Donnell, A., Dansereau, D., & Rocklin, T. (1987). 
Cognitive, social/affective, and metacognitive outcomes of scripted cooperative learning. 
Journal of Educational Psychology, 79, 431–437. 
Palincsar, A., & Herrenkohl, L. (2002). 
Designing Collaborative contexts. 
Theory into Practice, 41, 26–35. 
Perkins, D., Jay, E., & Tishman, S. (2006). 
Beyond abilities: A dispositional theory of thinkinghttp://learnweb.harvard.edu/alps/thinking/does/merrill.htm. 
Reznitskaya, A., Anderson, R., & Kuo, L. (2007). 
Teaching and learning argumentation. 
The Elementary School Journal, 107, 449–472. 
Rojas-Drummond, S., & Mercer, N. (2003). 
Scaffolding the development of effective collaboration and learning. 
International Journal of Educational Research, 39, 99– 111. 
Rojas-Drummond, S., & Zapata, M. (2004). 
Exploratory talk, argumentation and reasoning in Mexican primary school children. 
Language and Education, 18, 539– 557. 
Roth, W.-M., & Bowen, G. M. (1995). 
Knowing and interacting: A study of culture, practices, and resources in a grade 8 open-inquiry science classroom guided by a cognitive apprenticeship metaphor. 
Cognition and Instruction, 13(1), 73–128. 
Trowbridge, L. W., Bybee, R. W., & Powell, J. C. (2004). 
Inquiry and conceptual change. 
Teaching secondary school science: Strategies for developing scientiﬁc literacy. 
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education. 
(Chapter 11). 
Vaughn, S., Klingner, J., & Bryant, D. (2001). 
Collaborative strategic reading as a means to enhance peer-mediated instruction for reading comprehension and content-area learning. 
Remedial and Special Education, 22, 66–74. 
Veenman, S., Denessen, E., van den Akker, A., & van der Rijt, J. (2005). 
Effects of a cooperative learning program on the elaboration of students during help seeking and help giving. 
American Educational Research Journal, 42, 115–149. 
Veermans, M., Lallimo, J., & Hakkarainen, K. (2005). 
Patterns of guidance in inquiry learning. 
Journal of Interactive Learning Research, 16, 179–194. 
Webb, N. (1985). 
Student interaction and learning in small groups: A research summary. 
In R. Slavin, S. Sharon, S. Kagan, R. Hertz-Lazarowitz, C. Webb, & R. Schmuck (Eds.), Learning to cooperate, cooperating to learn (pp. 
5–15). 
New York: Plenum. 
Webb, N. (1989). 
Peer interaction and learning in small groups. 
International Journal of Educational Research, 13, 21–40. 
Webb, N. (1991). 
Task-related verbal interaction and mathematics learning in small groups. 
Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 22, 366–389. 
Webb, N. (1992). 
Testing a theoretical model of student interaction and learning in small groups. 
In R. Hertz-Lazarowitz & N. Miller (Eds.), Interaction in cooperative groups (pp. 
102–119). 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Webb, N. (2009). 
The teacher’s role in promoting collaborative dialogue in the classroom. 
British Journal of Educational Psychology, 79, 1–28. 
Webb, N., & Farivar, S. (1999). 
Developing productive group interaction in middle school mathematics. 
In A. O’Donnell & A. King (Eds.), Cognitive perspectives on peer learning (pp. 
117–150). 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Webb, N., & Mastergeorge, A. (2003). 
Promoting effective helping in peer-directed groups. 
International Journal of Educational Research, 39, 73–97. 
Wegerif, R., Linares, J., Rojas-Drummond, S., Mercer, N., & Velez, M. (2005). 
Thinking together in the UK and Mexico: Transfer of an educational innovation. 
Journal of Classroom Interaction, 40, 40–48. 
Wittrock, M. (1990). 
Generative processes of comprehension. 
Educational Psychologist, 24, 345–376. 
Woolfolk, A. (1998). 
Educational Psychology (7th ed.). 
Boston: Allyn & Bacon. 
Zuckerman, G., Chudinova, E., & Khavkin, E. (1998). 
Inquiry as a pivotal element of knowledge acquisition within a Vygotskian paradigm: Building a science curriculum in the elementary school. 
Cognition and Instruction, 16, 201–233. 
R.M. 
Gillies et al. / International Journal of Educational Research 53 (2012) 93–106106 