Keywords: Emotions; Risk taking; Decision making; Anger; Disgust; Evolutionary psychology Over the last decade, scholars have focused increasing attention on the role of emotions in decision making (Bosman & van Winden, 2001; Charland, 1998; Damasio, 1994; Elster, 1998; Loewenstein & Lerner, 2002; Loewenstein, Weber, Hsee, & Welch, 2001; Pillutla & Murnighan, 1996; Schwarz, 2000). 
A particularly important issue in this regard is the impact of emotions on decisions involving risk (deﬁned here as the potential for negative outcomes), as this category includes many behaviors that have signiﬁcant personal and social consequences. 
To date, investigators have sought to explain the inﬂuence of emotions on risk taking largely in term s of the eﬀects of attributes, or combinations of attributes, that diﬀerentiate emotions from one another at the proximate or descriptive level. 
In contrast to su ch an approach, we adopt an evolutionary view, arguing that the impact of emotions on risk taking is best explored in terms of the ultimate functions that speciﬁed emotions evolved to perform. 
After reviewing the literature, we demonstrate that an evolutionary functionalist approach accurately predicts diﬀering eﬀects on risk taking of two emotions, anger and disgust, diﬀerences that are not explicable in terms of the proximate dimensions emphasized by previous researchers. 
The same focus on ultimate functions also sheds light on sex diﬀerences, an issue hitherto largely overlooked in the literature on emotion and risk taking. 
0749-5978/$ - see front matter Ó 2004 Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.q This research was supported by Grant #CR-19097-433049 from the MacArthur Foundation Preferences Network to the ﬁrst author. 
We thank Scott Highhouse, two anonymous reviewers, and the members of the UCLA Experimental Biological Anthropology Lab for productive feedback. 
We are grateful to Michael Mitchell for advice on statistical methods, and to numerous research assistants for their help. 
* Corresponding author. 
Fax: 1-310-206-7833. 
E-mail address: dfessler@anthro.ucla.edu (D.M.T. 
Fessler). 
Review of research to date Emotions impact decision making in at least two ways. 
First, previously experienced emotions may inﬂuence the attractiveness of a variety of potential future courses of action, often via the anticipation of the eﬀects of various outcomes on oneÕs emotional state (Elster, 1998; Loewenstein et al., 2001; Mellers & McGraw, 2001; Mellers, Schwartz, & Ritov, 1999). 
While not unimportant, this aspect of emotions is of lesser interest to us, as, in these cases, emotions play a passive role in the decision making process, be ing simply one of many sources of an individualÕs preferences. 
In contrast, in a second class of situations, emotions play an active role in the decision making process. 
Speciﬁcally, the ongoing experience of an emotion may diﬀerentially highlight various options for responding to the eliciting event. 
Since many of the most dramatic (and often puzzling) decisions involving risk seem to be inﬂuenced by active rather than anticipated emotions, it is with this class of events that we concern ourselves here. 
The majority of contemporary theories regarding the relationship between active emotions and risk taking either derive from, or are reactions to, one of two seminal approaches to the problem, namely Isen and colleaguesÕ mood maintenance hypothesis, and Johnson and TverskyÕs (1983) aﬀective generalization hypothesis. 
As initially formulated by Isen and Patrick (1983), the mood maint enance hypothesis held that people in a positive mood avoid taking risks in order to maximize the likelihood that their positive mood will be maintained. 
This view was subsequently amended to include the proposal that those in a negative mood seek out risks in an attempt to achieve gains that will produce a positive mood (for contributions to the mood maintenance tradition, see Arkes, Herren, & Isen, 1988; Isen & Geva, 1987; Isen, Nygren, & Ashby, 1988; Mano, 1992; Nygren, Isen, Taylor, & Dulin, 1996). 
Although important ﬁndings have been contributed by investigators adopting this perspective, the approach nevertheless suﬀers from a number of limitations. 
First, advocates have interpreted mutually contradictory results as lending support to the proposition that people seek to maintain good moods and truncate bad ones (see esp. 
Arkes et al., 1988; Mano, 1992; Nygren et al., 1996). 
More broadly, the phenomenology of some negative emotions appears not to be consistent with the hypothesis (Hockey, Maule, Clough, & Bdzola, 2000). 
For example, angry people may ruminate on the eliciting event (Rusting & Nolen-Hoeksema, 1998) or seek out the antagonist (reviewed in Kring, 2000), behaviors that likely prolong rather than shorten this negative aﬀect. 
Consistent with this observation, as will be discussed at length, recent investigations indicate that emotions and moods do not have a uniform eﬀect on risk taking as a function of valence. 
Whereas the mood maintenance hypothesis seeks to explain the overarching eﬀects of emotions on risk taking, Johnson and TverskyÕs (1983) aﬀective generalization hypothesis focuses on subjective probabilities, a component of decision making. 
Johnson and Tversky claim that exposure to information that elicits negative aﬀect increases the perceived frequency of events which, though unrelated, have the same aﬀective valence. 
Unlike the mood maintenance hypothesis, the aﬀective generalization hypothesis does not view the impact of emotions on decision making as goal-directed, but rather presents the observed eﬀect as an accidental consequence of the operation of the emotion system. 
DeSteno, Petty, Wegener, and Rucker (2000) question both Johnson and TverskyÕs focus on valence and their afunctionalism. 
The authors argue that emotions inform individuals about the current state of the environment in which they ﬁnd themselves. 
Because the occurrence of an event of a given type is crudely predictive of the occurrence of other events of the same type, and because emotions mark such categories, DeSteno et al. predict that, rather than being a function of valence, the impact of emotions on frequency estimation should be emotion-speciﬁc. 
Presenting ne ws accounts that elicited either anger or sadness prior to a frequency-estimation task, the authors demonstrate that, although both primes elicited negative aﬀect, each prime inﬂuenced frequency estimates only for events associated with the given emotion. 
Inducing happiness, sadness, or anger using a relived emotion task, DeSteno et al. then demonstrate that, for participants low in need-for-cognition, even an obviously arbitrarily induced emotional state biases frequency estimates for events associated with the given emotion (see also Wright & Bower, 1992). 
Adopting a diﬀerent tactic in the attack on the primacy of valence in decision making, Lerner and Keltner (2000, 2001) argue that emotions are diﬀerentiated from one another not with regard to valence, but on the basis of diﬀerences in their impact on various cognitive appraisals—it is the latter, the authors assert, which shape the willingness to take risks. 
Drawing on Smith and El lsworth (1985), Lerner and Keltner (2000) argue that anger is associated with high certainty, medium anticipated eﬀort, high control, and high responsibility. 
In contrast, fear is associated with low certainty, high anticipated eﬀort, low control, and medium responsibility. 
Broadly, anger thus produces a tendency to perceive negative events as predictable, under human con trol, and brought about by others, while fear produces a tendency to perceive negative events as unpredictable and under situational control. 
Using both trait and state measures, the authors assessed fear and anger, then employed Johnson and TverskyÕs frequency-estimation task. 
Consistent with the claim that appraisal tendenci es determine the impac t of emotions, although both anger and fear are ne gatively valenced, angry people made optimistic judgements about the likelihood of adverse events, while the opposite was true of fearful people. 
Extending their method to decision making, Lerner and Keltner (2001) measured trait anger and fear, then gave participants Tversky and KahnemanÕs (1981) Asian Disease Problem, in which subjects must choose how best to save members of the public from a fatal illness. 
Consistent with the diﬀerences in appraisal tendencies between the two negatively valenced emotions, angry people made risk-seeking choices, while fearful people made risk-averse choices. 
Returning to subjective probabilities, adding a measure of trait happiness, the authors asked participants to estimate their chances of experiencing various life events. 
Again in contrast to valence-based predictions, both trait anger and trait happiness correlated positively with optimistic risk estimates, while trait fear had the opposite eﬀect, with the anger/ fear diﬀerence deriving from assessments of the probability of events that were seen as ambiguous with regard to their relative controllability. 
Finally, Lerner and Keltner used a relived emotion task to induce anger, fear, and happiness, assessed the degree of control and certainty that participants experienced in regard to the events described, and administered another life events questionnaire. 
Results indicate that diﬀerences between the eﬀects of anger and fear on probability estimates were mediated by diﬀerences in the perceived control associated with each class of elicitors. 
Building on Lerner and KeltnerÕs approach, Lerner, Gonzalez, Small, and Fischhoﬀ (2003) focused participantsÕ attention on feelings of either anger or fear in regard to the 9/11 terrorist attacks, then collected likelihood estimates regarding futur e events . 
Anger led to lower risk estimates, while fear had the opposite effect. 
MenÕs estimates were more optimistic than womenÕs, a pattern largely, but not wholly, accounted for by diﬀerences in the levels of anger and fear reported (no explanation is oﬀered for either the sex diﬀerence in emotional response or the residual sex diﬀerence in risk estimates). 
Consistent with the appraisal tendencies hypothesis, the authors interpret their results in term s of diﬀerences in control and certainty associated with anger and fear. 
Together with the work of others (e.g., Leith & Baumeister, 1996; Raghunathan & Pham, 1999 ), the investigations of DeSteno et al. and Lerner, Keltner, and colleagues demonstrate that the eﬀects of emotions on risk taking are unlikely to be principally explica ble as a function of valence. 
While these investigations cast doubt on the premise on which both the mood maintenance hypothesis and the aﬀective generalization hypothesis are based, for both methodological and theoretical reasons, the corpus of recent work leaves a number of questions outstanding regarding the impact of emotions on risk taking. 
Much work to date has focused on subjective probabilities. 
While estimations of the likelihood of various outcomes can impact decision making, this is not the only avenue whereby emotions may inﬂuence risk taking. 
Ethnographic accounts of real-world risk taking (e.g., Katz, 1999, pp. 18–83) suggest that emotions also shape both the subjective utility of various outcomes and the salience of those outcomes independent of their subjective probabilities. 
Hence, because subjective probabilities likely only incompletely determine actual choices, focusing on subjective probabilities may lead investigators to overlook some potentially important features of the relationship between emotions and risk taking behavior. 
Though developed in regard to the question of subjective probabilities, DeSteno et al.Õs event categorization perspective could conceivably be extended to address actual decision making. 
However, published results raise questions regarding the predictive power of such an extension. 
For example, failing to obtain money in a gamble might reasonably be expected to elicit sadness (among other emotions). 
The event categorization perspective therefore suggests that induced sadness should enhance the perceived likelihood of gambling failures, and hence, by extension, that sadness induction should decrease the preference for risky ch oices in gambling tasks. 
However, experiments reveal that sadness induction has either no eﬀect (Leith & Baumeister, 1996) or a positive impact (Raghunathan & Pham, 1999) on the preference for risky options in gambling tasks. 
This example suggests that, presumably as a consequence of the multiple avenues whereby emotions impact decision making, there may be limits on the extent to which DeSteno et al.Õs event categorization approach sheds light on actual risk taking behavior. 
Although most of their work has focused on subjective probabilities, Lerner and KeltnerÕs apprais al tendencies hypothesis is not limited to this aspect of decision making. 
Nevertheless, consider ation of the theoretical underpinnings of the appraisal tendencies perspective provides principled reasons why this approach may at times fail to predict the impact of emotions on actual risk taking. 
Though the authors do not develop the underlying rationale at length, Lerner and KeltnerÕs approach is based on the insight that each emotion constitutes an adaptive response to a class of events sharing a single core meaning (Frijda, 1986; Lazarus, 1991 ). However, foregrounding appraisal tendencies makes it easy to overlook the ultimate functions of the emotions at issue. 
We concur that emotions inﬂuence appraisals in order to shape behavior toward speciﬁc functional outcomes. 
However, we suggest that, because the same appraisal tendencies can serve diﬀerent overarching goals, focusing on appraisals rather than goals can erroneously predict similar eﬀects on decision making across very diﬀerent emotions. 
Adopting a more explicitly evolutionary perspective, we seek to illustrate the explanatory power of attending directly to the ultimate functions of the emotions at issue. 
An evolutionary approach to the impacts of anger and disgust on risk taking Considerable advances have recently been made in formulating and employing evolutionary approaches to the emotions (cf. Cosmides & Tooby, 2000; Edwards, 1999; Frank, 1988; Frijda, 1994; Johnston, 1999; Nesse, 1990; O ¨ ehman & Mineka, 2001; Weisfeld, 1997). 
Evolutionary perspectives share the premise on which Lerner and KeltnerÕs appraisal tendencies theory is based, namely that emotions constitute specialized responses to thematically uniﬁed classes of events. 
However, rather than simp ly taking this as a starting point, an evolutionary psychology of emotions explicitly focuses the theoretical lens on this issue. 
In so doing, this perspective diverges from other versions of functionalism. 
All functionalist theories are based on some metric whereby the utility of various outcomes can be assessed. 
Evolutionary approaches to the emotions diﬀer from other forms of functionalism in that the metric at issue is neither subjective well-being, social harmony, nor success in contemporary society. 
Rather, viewed from an evolutionary perspective, our capacity and propensity to experience emotions exist because emotions shape behaviors in ways that would have enhanced biological ﬁtness in the social and physical environments that humans occupied for most of our speciesÕ history. 
A central research tactic in the evolutionary psychology of the emotions is thus to: (1) determine the class of events that elicit a given emotion; (2) identify the manner in which, under ancestral conditions, such events would have impacted biological ﬁtness; and (3) examine how the given emotionÕs eﬀects on behavior would have often maximized ﬁtness in response to those events. 
Note that, because the modern world diﬀers profoundly from ancestral environments, there is no presumption that emotions currently enhance biological ﬁtness—just as today our evolved preferences for fat and sugar lead to health problems despite having functioned eﬀectively in an environment of caloric scarcity, so too may our emotions now often lead to ﬁtness-reducing, rather than ﬁtness-enhancing, outcomes. 
The approach outlined above is congruent with the empirical ﬁndings summarized earlier: from an evolutionary perspective, it is unlikely that emotions sharing the same valence would necessarily have the same eﬀect on risk taking, since valence is not uniformly associated with diﬀerent classes of adaptive functional goals. 
For example, the diﬀering impacts of fear and anger documented by Lerner and Keltner (2000, 2001) and Lerner et al. (2003) are consistent with the premise that each of these emotions addresses a diﬀerent adaptive problem. 
Fear, the response to imminent threat, motivates escape and the search for safety (Frijda, 1986; Laz arus, 1991; Levenson, 1999; O ¨ ehman & Mineka, 2001). 
Anger, the response to transgression, motivates aggression that truncates ongoing transgressions and/or deters future transgressions (Edwards, 1999, pp. 140–141; Frank, 1988; Frijda, 1986; Lazarus, 1991; Levenson, 1999; McGuire & Troisi, 1990). 
It is thus expectable that fear and anger will have opposite eﬀects on the propensity to take risks, as the functional objective of fear centers on minimizing the potential for harm to oneself, while the functional objective of anger entails increasing the immediate risks to which one is exposed. 
An evolutionary approach to emotions predicts differing impacts of fear and anger on risk taking without taking account of their respective appraisal tendencies. 
However, because the resulting prediction is identical to that generated by Lerner and KeltnerÕs perspective, the fear-versus-anger contrast does not allow us to determine which approach more accurately predicts the impact of emoti ons on risk taking. 
Consider, therefore, another negative emoti on, disgust. Viewed from an evolutionary perspective, disgust, the response to the presence of contamination, motivates avoidance of contact in order to reduce exposure to pathogens and toxins (Cosmides & Tooby, 2000; Curtis & Biran, 2001; Curtis, Aunger, & Rabie, 200 4 ; Fessler & Navarrete, 2003; Levenson, 1999; Wronska, 1990). 
An evolutionary functionalist perspective thus predicts that disgust will decrease risk taking behavior. 
Smith and Ellsworth (1985, pp. 827–829, 833), Lerner and KeltnerÕs primary source for the cognitive attributes associated with emotions, describe disgust as characterized by a similar amount of certainty and control compared to anger. 
Indeed, in the mapping of situational control-vs.-human control and self-vs.-other responsibility, of the 15 emotions evaluated, disgust is the most similar to anger. 
Lerner and KeltnerÕs appraisal-tendency perspective therefore predicts that disgust will operate in a similar fashion to anger, i.e., it will increase risk taking behavior. 
Hence, because the evolutionary functionalist perspective and the appraisal-tendency view generat e opposite predictions with regard to the eﬀects of disgust on risk taking, this emotion con stitutes an ideal focus for a test intended to diﬀerentiate between the two approaches. 
To examine the predictive power of an evolutionary functionalist perspective relative to an appraisal-tendency view, we set out to investigate the inﬂuence of disgust on risk taking behavior. 
Anger, another negatively valenced emotion, has ﬁgured prominently in previous investigations, and, consistent with conclusions therein, naturalistic data strongly suggest that anger has a particularly signiﬁcant positive (i.e., exacerbating) impact on risk taking (Daly & Wilson, 1988; Kring, 2000). 
Anger is therefore an attractive point of comparison for disgust. Predicted sex diﬀerences in the eﬀects of anger and disgust To date, although a substantial corpus of research examines sex diﬀerences in risk taking (Byrnes, Miller, & Schafer, 1999; see also Eckel & Grossman, 2002), investigators interested in the eﬀects of emotions on such behavior ha ve largely overlooked this topic, presumably because it is extra neous to the assumptions on which existing theories are premised. 
In contrast, due to fundamental diﬀerences in the adaptive challenges that confronted men and women in the evolutionary past, sex diﬀerences play a central role in evolutionary approaches to risk taking (Eckel & Grossman, 2002; Fetchenhauer & Rohde, 2002; Wilson & Daly, 1985). 
All human populations exhibit sexual dimorphism in which mean male height and strength exceed those of females (Holden & Mace, 1999). 
Cross-species comparisons indicate that such dimorphism is explicable in terms of diﬀerences between the sexes in the variance in reproductive success among members of the same sex (Alexander, Hoogland, Howard, Noonan, & Sherman, 1979; Plavcan & Van Schaik, 1997). 
Brieﬂy, because relative diﬀerences in reproductive success lie at the heart of the processes of natural selection that shap e organisms, in any species, the prevailing level of social competition is expected to be a function of the variance in reproductive success. 
If there is little variance in this regard, social competition can be construed as a lowstakes game since, from the perspective of natural selection, the disparity between winners and losers is small. 
Conversely, if there is high variance in reproductive success, social competition constitutes a high-stakes game, one in which winners produce many progeny and losers produce few or none. 
Sexual dimorphism in size and strength oc curs when greater variance in reproductive success in one sex (typically males) favors the evolution of enhanced ﬁghting abilities, as the costs of armam ents and the risks of combat are outweighed by the gains to be reaped by excluding reproductive competitors (reviewed in Plavcan & Van Schaik, 1997). 
Because competitive armaments are of little use without correspondin gly aggressive behavioral inclinations, natural selection shapes behavior as well as morphology. 
Accordingly, consistent with the logic of a high-stakes game, in a sexually dimorphic species, the larger sex can be expected to be both more willing to transgress against competitors and more willing to risk incurring high costs in order to deter transgressions. 
In our species, this panmammalian pattern is ampliﬁed by a number of uniquely human attributes. 
First, because language allows for the establishment of reputations, the ramiﬁcations of a given transgression are not limited to the actors present at the time of the event. 
Failure to respond aggressively to a transgression can lead to a reputation as an Ôeasy mark,Õ inviting additional transgressions by a large number of rivals. 
Conversely, disproportionately aggressive reactions to transgression can establish a reputation as a dangerous Ôhothead,Õ eﬀectively deterring many who might otherwise contemplate transgressing against the actor (Frank, 1988; Daly & Wilson, 1988). 
Second, our species is unique among primates in combining male–male sociality with high paternal investment in oﬀspring. 
In other primate species, if the male greatly assists the female in rearing oﬀspring, few or no other males occupy the same territory; conversely, if many males live in a single group, males do very little to assist in rearing oﬀspring (see reviews in Smuts, Cheney, Seyfarth, & Struhsaker, 1987). 
Male investment in rearing creates an opportunity for exploitation, since cuckolded males may unknowingly waste their investment on other malesÕ progeny. 
Presumably, in ancestral hominids, the beneﬁts of malemale cooperation favored sociality despite the costs of living in proximity to potential lotharios. 
Nevertheless, the presence of other males will have intensiﬁed the selective pressur e for a male propensity to guard femalesÕ reproductive capacit ies. 
Consistent with this logic, around the world, adultery is deﬁned as a transgression against a cuckolded man (Wilson & Daly, 1992); correspondingly, human males exhibit a proprietary attitude toward women in whom they invest (Wilson & Daly, 1992), and are prone to sexual jealousy (Buss, Larsen, Westen, & Semmelroth, 1992), an emotion with a strong anger component (Mullen & Martin, 1994). 
Angry, jealous men frequent ly physically assault their rivals, often with the explicit goal of seeking retribution and deterring future transgressions (Felson, 1997 ). Finally, reputation eﬀects and the costs of cuckoldry compound one another, as rivals may be more likely to attempt to seduce the wife of a man who has a reputation for failing to respond aggressively to transgressions. 
As a consequence of the factors discussed above, in ancestral populations, men stood to reap signiﬁcant ﬁtness beneﬁts from a demonstrable willingness to risk incurring substantial costs in order to inﬂict costs on transgressors (Daly & Wilson, 1988; Wilson & Daly, 1985). 
In contrast, although ancestral women were not immune to ﬁtness decrements due to transgressions, for several reasons, females should have been only willing to incur lower costs in reacting to transgressions. 
First, consistent with the logic of a low-stakes game, for women, it would generally not have been worth jeopardizing oneÕs survival or that of oneÕs dependent oﬀspring in order to gain a relatively small advantage over female rivals. 
Second, because women could obtain both provisioning and protection from men, women would often not have beneﬁted by placing themselves in danger in order to de fend against transgression—far better to appeal to risk-prone males to either replace the stolen goods, attack the trans gressors, or both. 
Together, the factors discussed above lead to the conclusion that natural selection can be expected to have favored a greater willingness among men to incur costs in reacting to transgression. 
Anger is a central part of the proximate mechanism shaping the behavioral response to transgression, hence anger can be expected to have led to greater risk taking in men than in women. 
Because, on an evolutionary time scale, our rise from a hunter–gatherer lifestyle has occurred in the blink of an eye, this diﬀerence should persist to the present day even though human reproduction is now largely divorced from the factors that governed it for most of our speciesÕ history. 
This perspective is consistent with: (a) the vastly greater representation of men in violent conﬂicts that begin as trivial altercations (Daly & Wilson, 1990; Ghiglieri, 1999), and (b) the ﬁnding that men are more likely to confront the target of their anger, particularly when it is a stranger, while women are more likely to turn to others for support (reviewed in Kring, 2000) or to seek to damage the transgressorÕs social standing through gossip, alliance manipulation, or other indirect means (reviewed in Campbell, 2002, pp. 90–94). 
While similarly arguing that natural selection has favored greater avoidance of physical harm among females, Campbell (2002, pp. 74–100) develops an alternative to the proposal outlined above. 
Citing Brody, Lovas, and HayÕs (1995) ﬁnding that anger-eliciting situations evoke more fear in women than in men (and consistent with Lerner et al.Õs, 2003 results), Campbell proposes that, although transgressions stimulate equivalently risk-promoting anger among men and women, the latterÕs greater fear response inhibits them from taking risks. 
Just as the costs and beneﬁts of reacting aggressively to transgression likely diﬀered across the sexes in ancestral populations, so too did men and women likely diﬀer with regard to the costs and beneﬁts of avoiding contamination. 
Because reproductive success is the nexus of natural selection, the more directly, and the more strongly, that any trait aﬀects reproduction, the greater the selective pressures shaping that trait. 
A womanÕs reproductive success is contingent on her ability to carry each pregnancy to term. 
Because the process of organogenesis is highly vulnerable to perturbation, pathogens, and parasites can signiﬁcantly disrupt embryonic and fetal development. 
Yet, at precisely this crucial time in a womanÕs life, her ability to ward oﬀ infections is severely compromised. 
The immun e system guards the body by detecting and attack ing foreign material. Because half of the embryoÕs genes come from the father, if left to its own devices, the maternal immune system would destroy the embryo. 
Pregnancy is therefore accompanied by a suppression of the maternal immune system, creating unavoidable vulnerability to infection (reviewed in Fessler, 2002). 
Behavioral prophylaxis oﬀers a means of mitigating the costs of this gestational immunosuppression. 
Moreover, because immunosuppression also occurs in anticipation of pregnancy, the window of vulnerability is not limited to gestation, but also occurs on a cyclic basis in nonpregnant women of reproductive age (reviewed in Fessler, 2001b), a pattern favoring extension of behavioral prophylaxis outside of the period of gestation. 
Reproductive immunosuppression may thus have generated selective pressure leading to enhanced caution in women when confronted by potential sources of infection. 
The selective pressure favoring female caution in the presence of contaminants will have been augmented by human patterns of caretaking behavior. 
As a result of both the sex diﬀerence in the ability to lactate and a pervasive gender-based division of labor, in traditional small-scale societies, infants and small children are cared for primarily by their mothers and other female kin. 
Human oﬀspring, being highly altricial, are extremely vulnerable to disease throughout this period. 
Patterns of caretaking likely thus increased the importance of contaminant avoidance, as human females in ancestral populations who failed in this regard would have risked sickening their infants or younger siblings (Curtis et al., 2004). 
In marked contrast to the female case, male s in ancestral populations may have beneﬁted from demonstrable indiﬀerence to the risk of contamination. 
As in many other species in which the variance in reproductive success diﬀers across the sexes, reproductive access to sexually mature females is a principal determinant of human male reproductive success. 
While aggressive male-male competition is one factor inﬂuencing such access, female choice is equally, if not more, important. 
Among the criteria employed by women in selecting a mate, physical and behavioral attributes indicative of genetic quality loom large, particularly when selecting a short-term partner. 
Male secondary sex characteristics (in humans, these include prominent brow ridges, a deep voice, and facial hair) all advertise the presence of high levels of androgens. 
Because these hormones have immunosuppressive eﬀects, males who display marked secondary sex characteristics while remaining healthy signal to prospective mates that they possess the genes for a robust ability to combat pathogens, a feature of great value in a mate (Folstad & Karter, 1992; see Rhodes, Chan, Zebrowitz, & Simmons, 2003 for review). 
A maleÕs willingness to approach sources of contamination can be viewed as a behavioral analog of such morphological signals, a claim regarding the individualÕs immunological robusticity—just as bright plumage or a large rack of antlers communicates to nonhuman females that a male is able to aﬀord the costs of androgen-induced immunosuppression, so too does indiﬀerence to the presence of contaminants by a highly masculine man send the message to women that the individual carries the genes for a very eﬀective immune system. 
Hence, in ancestral human populations, natural selection would have favored males who exercised the absolute minimum aﬀordable level of disease avoidance, operationalized as a muted increase in caution during the experience of disgust— any excess of caution in the presence of contaminants would have signaled poor genetic quality, and hence would have decreased a manÕs ability to attract mates. 
The communicative value for males of a lack of caution in the presence of contaminants may also extend beyond the question of heritable diﬀerences in immunological robusticity. 
Because a willingness to take risks with oneÕs physical welfare in one domain is often crudely predictive of equivalent behavior in other domains, following the logic delineated above for anger, minimiz ing caution in response to disgust elicitors can signal to both prospective mates and rivals that, because the man is indiﬀerent to potential harm, he is a formidable protector and adversary, respectively. 
Support for this possibility comes from the existence of male competitive displays of indiﬀerence to disgust stimuli (e.g., goldﬁsh swallowing contests among fraternity members in American universities). 
In sum, observations regarding the costs of female reproductive immunosuppression and the beneﬁts of male signaling lead to the same prediction, namely that disgust, the response to contaminants, will decrease risk taking more in women than in men. 
Methodological considerations In addition to predicting sex diﬀerences in the impact of anger and disgust on risk taking, the evolutionary rationales laid out above can also be read as predicting sex diﬀerences in the ease and intensity with which these emotions are elicited, as behavioral sex diﬀerences might be produced via: (a) diﬀerences in the operation of the respective emotions across the sexes, (b) diﬀerences in the response thresholds for the respect ive emotions across the sexes (Loewenstein et al., 2001), or (c) both. 
While considerable research suggests that the frequency and intensity with which anger is experienced does not diﬀer across the sexes (reviewed in Krin g, 2000; see also Milovchevich, Howells, Drew, & Day, 2001), additional work indicates that women are more easily and more intensely disgusted than men (Haidt, McCauley, & Rozin, 1994; Quigley, Sherman, & Sherman, 1997). 
In addition, there is evidence that the sexes diﬀer with regard to the kinds of events most likely to elicit anger (reviewed in Kring, 2000; see also Buss, 1989). 
Because we are interested here in investigating the possibility that anger and disgust are operationally sexually dimorphic with regard to their impact on risk taking, it is important to select a method that is likely to elicit equivalent levels of the target emotions in men and women. 
Relived emotion tasks are therefore useful, as endogenous stimulation may circumvent the problems raised by sex diﬀerences in both disgust sensitivity and the evocative power of some anger elicitors. 
Because individuals likely diﬀer with regard to a variety of attribut es that might impact performance on our measure of risk taking, thereby introducing noise into the results, we sought to measure self-reported risk taking behavior in a number of domains. 
With the above considerations in mind, we conducted a study composed of three elements: (1) a questionnaire asking participants to report their level of participation in a wide variety of risk taking activities, (2) a relived emotion exercise, and (3) a decision making task in which participants repeatedly chose between a substantial guaranteed payoﬀ and a chance at a larger sum. 
Methods Participants Participants wer e recruited using ﬂyers posted on the UCLA campus and announcements in large undergraduate classes at UCLA. 
Participants were UCLA undergraduate students and staﬀ. 
Participation was anonymous and voluntary. 
Participants received $5.00 for participation in addition to any moneys obtained in the Choice Task (see below). 
For reasons of expediency, the study discussed here was conducted concurrently with two other investigations; participants were randomly assigned to one of six conditions, anger, disgust, control, or three conditions not relevant to the present discussion. 
Twenty men and 20 women were assigned to each condition. 
One man failed to complete participation in the disgust condition, resulting in a sample of 59 men and 60 women (mean age = 21 years, SD = 2.4, range = 18–34) distributed across the three conditions with which we are here concerned. 
Procedure Participants ﬁrst completed a questionnaire composed of 27 items intended to measure the frequency with which they engaged in risky behaviors in the following domains: physical risk (e.g., ‘‘In your lifetime, how many times have you broken bones as a consequence of your own actions?’’), social risk (e.g., ‘‘In the past year, have you publicly stood up for an unpopular belief/opinion in the face of general disagreement?’’), and sexual risk (e.g., ‘‘In the last year, how many sexual partners have you had?’’). 
Following completion of the behavior inventory, a research assistant read a script (see Appendix A) containing instructions for both the Choice Task (see below) and an emotion induction procedure, described as a ‘‘visualization task.’’ Instructions for the Choice Task were presented prior to emotion induction in order to redu ce the delay between induction and the measure of risk taking. 
Because norms for the expression of anger and disgust likely diﬀer by gender (Fischer & Manstead, 2000; Kring, 2000; Kring & Gordon, 1998; Milovchevich et al., 2001), every eﬀort was made to minimize impression management eﬀects: the participant was left alone in a room to complete the task, was reminded in writing that the task was anonymous, and was told to seal the materials in an envelope upon completion of the task, with the assurance that the envelope would remain sealed until the entire project was ﬁnished. 
Written instructions, read in private, asked participants to recal l or imagine a time when they had experienced the target emotion, then write a brief essay about that time. 
For example, in the anger condition, participants were instructed: ‘‘(a) Imagine that someone has done something to make you really angry. 
Brieﬂy describe the circumstances that would make you the most angry. 
(b) Jot down, as speciﬁcally as you can, your feelings and emotions in response to the angry situation you just described.’’ Participants in the control condition were instructed to describe the experience of watching television. 
Immediately following the emotion induction task, in the same private room wher e emotion induction had occurred, a research assistant orally administered the Choice Task (adapted from Henrich & McElreath, 2002) (see Appendix B). Participants were asked to make a series of four choices in four independent rounds of play; each choice consisted of a sure payoﬀ option of $15.00 and a chance option to obtain a greater sum of money at a known probability. 
The expected value of all options was $15.00; chance options were as follows: $18.75 at an 80% chance, $37.50 at a 40% chance, $75.00 at a 20% chance, and $300.00 at a 5% chance. 
Half of the participants received the rounds of play in order of decreasing probability (i.e., the 80% chance ﬁrst and the 5% chance last) and half the participants received the rounds of play in the opposite order. 
Because performance is generally better when reasoning about frequencies than when reasoning about probabilities (Gigerenzer & Hoﬀrage, 1995), for each risky option, the odds were expressed both as a frequency (X out of 20) and as a probability. 
Participants had been instructed to make their choice in each round independently of all other rounds, and had been told that, once they had made all four choices, one of the rounds would be chosen at random using a spinner, and they would be paid according to their choice in that round, with chance options being operationalized via the drawing of colored marbles from a bag. 
The task was administered orally in order to make it more diﬃcult for participants to review prior choices in making a given choice. 
As a manipulation check, after participants had made each of their four choices, but before one round was selected to be carried out, participants completed the PANAS-X state aﬀect scale (Watson & Clark, 1994) in order to assess the extent to which the target emotion was active at the time that the choices were made. 
A round was then selected, the choice was carried out, payment was provided, and the participant was thanked and escorted to the hall. 
Care was taken to avoid contact between participants leaving the lab and those waiting to participate so as to reduce the likelihood that comments or aﬀective displays by departing individuals would inﬂuence subsequent participantsÕ behavior. 
Results Risk taking Because our predictions concerned the eﬀects of emotions on the general tendency to take risks rather than on the diﬀerential attractiveness of any particular risky option relative to other such options, we elected to assess risk taking by counting the number of times that a participant selected the chance option on the Choice Task. 
Selecting the sure payoﬀ option in a given round was designated with a risk score of 0, while selecting the chance option in a given round was designated with a risk score of 1. Summing these scores over the four rounds produced total risk scores ranging from 0 (i.e., the participant selected the sure payoﬀ option in all four rounds) to 4 (i.e., the participant selected the chance option in all four rounds). 
Because this scale exhibited only modest internal consistency (a = .38), we tested for differential eﬀects of diﬀerent levels of risk (e.g., a 20% gamble for a slight increase in payment, a 5% gamble for a large payoﬀ, etc.) using regres sion analyses to explore possible interactions between speciﬁc risk levels, sex, and emotion induction conditions. 
None of the interactions with individual levels of risk were signiﬁcant, indicating that, within condition and within sex, participants were not treating diﬀerent levels of risk signiﬁcantly diﬀerently from one another, and hence our decision to sum the number of risky choices across the four rounds did not inherently bias the test in favor of the predicted pattern of results. 
Regression analyses All analyses were performed using the total risk score described above as the dependent measure. 
Tests of predictions are two-tailed unless otherwise noted. 
Risky behavior inventory A factor analytic examination of responses across conditions to the 27 questions in the risky behavior inventory revealed that 20 of these parsed neatly into three internally consistent subscales corresponding with the three domains of risk taking we had sought to measure: sexual risk taking (four items, a = .55), physical risk taking (11 items, a = .67), and social risk taking (ﬁve items, a = .66). 
Because responses on these subscales were largely correl ated with one another (physical risk with social risk: r = .24, p < .01; physical risk with sexual risk: r = .23, p < .05; sexual risk with social risk: r = .08, ns) we constructed a single highly consistent risky behavior scale composed of all 20 items (a = .72). 
Across the sample as a whole, men reported far greater rates of risky behavior than did women (F(1, 117) = 16.52, p < .001), a pattern driven by greater physical risk taking (F(1, 117) = 9.27, p < .01), and greater social risk taking (F(1, 117) = 6.91, p < .01); no sex diﬀerence was reported in sexual risk taking (F(1, 117) = 1.77, p = .19). 
Scores on the composite risky behavior scale were signiﬁcantly correlated with performance in the Choice Task (r = .27, p < .01), and the same was true of scores on the social risk taking subscale (r = .18, p = .05) and the sexual risk taking subscale (r = .22, p < .05); scores on the physical risk taking subscale were only marginally correlated with responses on the Choice Task (r = .16, p = .08). 
Emotion induction To assess the eﬀectiveness of the emotion induction task, we used two separate manipulation checks. 
The ﬁrst was participantsÕ self-report of their aﬀective state following the emotion induction task as recorded using the PANAS-X (Watson & Clark, 1994). 
Participants in the anger condition reported experiencing signiﬁcantly more anger (B = 1.58, SE = .25, t = 6.32, p < .001) and disgust (B = 1.23, SE = .22, t = 5.61, p < .001) than did participants in the control condition. 
There was no interaction of emotion induction condition with sex of participant on self-reported emotional intensity for either anger (B = .35, SE = .50, t = 0.70, p = .48) or disgust (B = .05, SE = .44, t = 0.11, p = .91). 
In light of CampbellÕs (2002) hypothesis that sex diﬀerences in risk taking in response to transgression are caused by great er female fear during anger-eliciting events, we also examined the level of self-reported fear, ﬁnding no eﬀect of emotion induction condition on self-reported fear (B = .21, SE = .15, t = 1.44, p = .15) and no interaction of emotion induction condition and sex on fear (B = À.24, SE = .29, t = À0.83, p = .41). 
In this condition, there was also no main eﬀect of sex on self-reported fear (B = À.16, SE = .15, t = À1.12, p = .27). 
In the disgust condition, participants reported experiencing signiﬁcantly more disgust (B = 2.51, SE = .21, t = 12.01, p < .001) and signiﬁcantly more anger (B = 1.25, SE = .24, t = 5.02, p < .001) than participants in the control condition. 
There was no interaction with sex on levels of self-reported anger (B = À.31, SE = .49, t = À0.63, p = .27), but there was a signiﬁcant interactio n of emotion induction condition and sex on self-reported feelings of disgust (B = À1.21, SE = .42, t = À2.90, p < .01), as women reported feeling less disgust than men. 
There was also no main eﬀect of emotion induction condition on self-reported levels of fear (B = .25, SE = .15, t = 1.62, p = .11), nor was there a signiﬁcant interaction of sex and emotion induction condition (B = À.50, SE = .30, t = À1.67, p = .10). 
There was, however, a margi nally signiﬁcant main eﬀect of sex on self-reported levels of fear (B = À.29, SE = .15, t = À1.95, p = .06), as men reported feeling more fear than did women. 
Men reported signiﬁcantly more fear in the disgust condition than in the neutral condition (B = .50, SE = .21, t = 2.33, p < .05); a pattern that was not present among women (B = À.01, SE = .21, t = À0.03, p = 1.00). 
As a second manipulation check, ﬁve undergraduate raters (one male and four females, mean age = 20), blind to both the con tent of the emotion induction tasks and the sex of the participants, independently rated the emotional content of the essays with regard to the degree to which eight diﬀerent emotions (anger, disgust, romantic love, non-romantic love, mirth, contempt, moral outrage, and sexual arousal) were expressed in the essay (the additional emotions listed were selected based on research interests beyond the scope of this paper; CampbellÕs (2002) hypothesis had not yet been published at the time of our study, hence we did not include fear among the emotions to be evaluated). 
Using an unbiased estimate of variance (Winer, 1971), the mean interrater reliability for coding the presence of these eight emotions in the essays was .73. 
For the two emotions of interest in the present analysis, reliability was as follows: anger = .90, disgust = .93. 
In light of the high level of interrater reliability, scores were averaged across all ﬁve raters. 
Raters found signiﬁcantly more anger content in essays written by participants in the anger condition (B = 6.97, SE = .38, t = 18.31, p < .001) than in those produced by participants in the control condition, but did not ﬁnd signiﬁcantly more disgust content (B = .08, SE = .11, t = 0.74, p = .46). 
There were no sex diﬀerences in either the amount of anger (B = .15, SE = .76, t = 0.20, p = .84) or disgust (B = .23, SE = .23, t = 1.03, p = .31) expressed in the anger essays. 
Raters found signiﬁcantly more disgust content (B = 6.70, SE = .77, t = 8.67, p < .001) and signiﬁcantly more anger content (B = 3.94, SE = .58, t = 6.75, p < .001) in essays written by participants in the disgust condition than in those produced by the control cond ition. 
There were no interactions of emotion induction condition with sex on either disgust content ( B = À1.04, SE = 1.55, t = À0.67, p = .51) or anger content (B = 1.74, SE = 1.17, t = 1.49, p = .14). 
RatersÕ assessments of the aﬀective content of the essays largely matched self-reported aﬀect on the PANAS-X—the correlation between the two measures of anger was .52 (p < .001), and the correlation between the two measures of disgust was .49 (p < .001). 
Risk taking in the control condition Among participants in the control condition, there were no sex diﬀerences in risk taking on the Choice Task (B = À.09, SE = .35, t = À0.26, p = .80). 
Emotional arousal and risk taking Due to the strong correlation between self-reported risk taking behaviors and performance on the experimental task, the composite risky behaviors scale was included in all analyses of the dependent variable. 
Because feelings of anger and disgust were highly positively correlated with one another in participantsÕ self-reports (r = .61, p < .001) (though not in ratersÕ evaluations: r = À.17, p < .05), in all analyses of the dependent variable, the non-target emotion was statistically controlled to eliminate the confounding eﬀects of that emotion. 
Self-reported fear was statistically controlled across all conditions. 
Anger and risk taking The main eﬀect of anger on risk taking failed to reach signiﬁcance, but exhibited a clear trend such that those individuals who were made to feel angry were more likely to make risky decisions than those in the control condition (B = .49, SE = .29, t = 1.66, p = .10). 
There was, however, a signiﬁcant interaction of emotion induction condition and sex of participant (B = À1.06, SE = .50, t = À2.13, p < .05). 
Among men, those in the angry condition chose signiﬁcantly more chance options than those in the control condition (B = 1.01, SE = .38, t = 2.66, p = .01, see Fig. 1). Among women, there was no diﬀerence in the number of chance options chosen based upon emotion condition (B = À.04, SE = .39, t = À0.11, p = .92). 
There was also a main eﬀect of self-reported risky beha viors on performance in the choice task (B = 1.06, SE = .47, t = 2.25, p < .05). 
Disgust and risk taking In the disgust condition, there was no main eﬀect of emotion induction condition on risk taking (B = À.25, SE = .29, t = À0.86, p = .18). 
However, there was again a signiﬁcant interaction of emotion induction condition and sex of participant on risk taking (B = À1.28, SE = .29, t = À2.43, p < .05). 
Women in the disgust condition chose signiﬁcantly fewer chance options than women in the control condition (B = À.96, SE = .45, t = À2.12, p < .05, see Fig. 2). Men in the disgust condition did not show any diﬀerence in risk taking compared to men in the control condition ( B = .26, SE = .58, t = 0.39, p = .70). 
Once again, there was a signiﬁcant effect of individual diﬀerences in self-reported risky behavior on performance in the experimental task (B = 1.09, SE = .50, t = 2.16, p < .05). 
Discussion Consistent with our predictions regarding both the respective impacts of anger and disgust on risk taking Fig. 1. The eﬀect of the emotion induction condition ‘‘Anger’’ on menÕs and womenÕs risk-taking, as measured by number of chance options chosen in the Choice Task (means adjusted by individual diﬀerences in risk-taking and non-target emotions). 
Fig. 2. The eﬀect of the emotion induction condition ‘‘Disgust’’ on menÕs and womenÕs risk-taking, as measured by number of chance options chosen in the Choice Task (means adjusted for individual diﬀerences in risk-taking and non-target emotions). 
and sex diﬀerences in such eﬀects, our examination of decisions concerning substantial real monetary stakes revealed that, among men, participants in the anger condition selected a larger number of risky choices than those in the control condition, yet there was no diﬀerence in this regard between the disgust condition and controls. 
Conversely, among women, while participants in the anger condition did not diﬀer in their choices from controls, participants in the disgust condition selected signiﬁcantly fewer risky choices than those in the control condition. 
Self-report scores on the PANAS-X and ratersÕ evaluations of participantsÕ essays indicate that our manipulations successfully induced the target aﬀects, produ cing signiﬁcant diﬀerences in emotional states between the experimental conditions and the control condition. 
Consistent with both: (a) the thematic associations between anger and disgust (Nabi, 2002 ; Smith & Ellsworth, 1985), and (b) the tendency for induction procedures to sometimes elicit multiple emotions (Polivy, 1981), participants in each of the experimental conditions also reported more of the other target emotion than did participants in the control condition; a similar overlap oc curred with regard to ratersÕ evaluations of essays produced by participants in the disgust condition. 
In our analysis, we compensated for this overlap by controlling for the degree of elicitation of the non-target emotion. 
The sex diﬀerences present in our results are unlikely to be due to diﬀerences in the strength of the induction of the target emotions. 
Raters found no sex diﬀerences in the amount of either target emotion expressed in the essays written by participants in the experimental conditions. 
More directly, scores on the PANAS-X indicate that male and female participants in the anger condition reported equal levels of anger, while in the disgust condition women reported less disgust than men, the opposite from what would be expected if womenÕs greater reduction in risk taking following disgust induction was due to a sex diﬀerence in elicitation. 
Our results are not explicable in terms of CampbellÕs (2002) hypothesis that the sex diﬀerence in risk taking in response to anger-eliciting situations is due to greater concomitant fear in women, as men and women in the anger condition did not diﬀer in level of self-reported fear (and, in addition, the sex diﬀerence in the impact of anger on risk taking was clearly evident even though self-reported fear was statistically controlled). 
We therefore conclude that, as we predicted, anger operates in a sexually dimorphic fashion independent of any contributions that fear may make to sex diﬀerences in risk taking. 
We similarly interpret our disgust results as indicating that, in addition to sex diﬀerences in disgust sensitivity, sexual dimorphism characterizes the operational consequences of this emotion for risk taking. 
The conclusion that emotions can inﬂuence risk taking in a sexually dimorphic fashion may shed light on some of the apparently contradictory ﬁndings reported in the literature, as it is possible that diﬀerences in the sex ratios of samples contributed to the divergent results obtained across investigations. 
Although we found sex-speciﬁc eﬀects of emotions on risk taking, these were measurable only in terms of the number of chance options selected—angry men selected more of the risky choices, and disgusted women selected fewer of the risky choices, but neither category diﬀered in terms of the tendency to select choices with lower versus higher odds of success. 
This may reﬂect the complexity of the method employed—because the Choice Task was administered orally, participants may have had difﬁculty contemplating the options in detail, and may therefore have simply dichotomized them as either certain or risky. 
Alternately, it is possible that the process whereby emotions inﬂuence risk taking involves a simple categorization of options as either risky or non-risky (cf. Loewenstein et al., 2001, pp. 276–277), in which case modiﬁcations of the Choice Task (such as training sessions in advance of emotion induction) should have no eﬀect. 
We believe that our demonstration that two negative emotions exert diametrically opposed inﬂuences on risk taking adds additional evidence to the case against valence-based theories of the impac t of emotions on decision making. 
Similarly, while the study of appraisals associated with speciﬁc emotions may shed light on the interaction of aﬀective and cognit ive systems, given that our evolutionary functionalist perspective successfully predicted diﬀerences in the behavioral consequences of anger and disgust, whereas Lerner and KeltnerÕs appraisal-tendencies theory predicted only similarities, we feel that our approach provides a more fruitful framework for understanding the impact of emotions on risk taking. 
1 Abandoning an appraisal-tendency perspective on emotions in favor of an evolutionary functionalist one comes at some cost, as the latter is more diﬃcult to operationalize. 
Targeted investigations such as those of Smith and Ellsworth (1985) suﬃce to identify appraisal tendencies. 
In contrast, while the ultimate functions of some emotions are obvious, this is not true of others. 
Some of the most productive insights concerning the functions of emotions have been generated by game theoretic analyses (e.g., Frank, 1988; Hirshleifer, 1987), inviting collaboration between theorists who produce hypotheses regarding the utility of speciﬁc emotions 1 Our results also call into question Leith and BaumeisterÕs (1996) claim that only high arousal negatively valenced emotions inﬂuence risk taking. 
Disgust involves even lower arousal than sadness (Scherer & Wallbott, 1994, p. 321), the low arousal negative emotion employed by Leith and Baumeister, hence, according to their formulation, disgust should have had no eﬀect on risk taking. 
and empiricists who use these hypotheses to generate predictions regarding the impacts of said aﬀects on risk taking. 
In addition to providing grounds for evaluating the usefulness of various competing theories for predicting the impact of speciﬁc emotions on risk taking, our results shed additional light on the general role of aﬀect in decision making. 
Our method of emotion induction was blatant, indicating that, despite the substantial stakes at issue, participantsÕ risk taking behavior was inﬂuenced by emotions the sources of which were obviously unconnected to the decision at hand. 
Our ﬁndi ngs therefore support the view that emotions con stitute a relatively autonomous channel of inﬂuence on decision making, operating in conjunction with, but largely independent of, more strictly cognitive processes (Clore, Gasper, & Garvin, 2001; Ketelaar & Clore, 1997; Loewenstein, 2000; Loewenstein et al., 2001). 
Limitations Although we predicted that anger should increase risk taking less among women than among men, and that disgust should decrease risk taking less among men than among women, we found more extensive sex diﬀerences, with anger having no signiﬁcant eﬀect on female risk taking, and disgust having no signiﬁcant eﬀect on male risk taking. 
An evolutionary functionalist perspective suggests that it is unlikely that anger and disgust have no impact on risk taking in women and men, respect ively. 
Rather, the orally administered Choice Task, with its weak internal consistency, is probably too crude a measure of risk taking to capture these more muted eﬀects. 
The latter explanation is consistent with the absence of a sex diﬀerence in risk taking among participants in the neutral condition, a pattern that contrasts with othersÕ reports of greater male risk taking in the ﬁnancial/gambling domain (Eckel & Grossman, 2002; Johnson, Wilke, & Weber, n.d.; Weber, Blais, & Betz, 2002). 
Our results should be considered preliminary given that: (a) the most ecologically valid measures of the impact of emotions on risk taking are those that include not only risk but also uncertainty (Hockey et al., 2000), and (b) decisions made on the basis of probability assessments derived from experience diﬀer from those made on the basis of stated probabilities (Weber, Shaﬁr, & Blais, 2004). 
Our ﬁndings should also be treated with caution given that, whereas in the Choice Task risk concerns potentially lost gains, risk taking in daily life often involves potential losses from baseline. 
Although ﬁndings regarding the endowment eﬀect (Kahneman, Knetsch, & Thaler, 1991) suggest that it might be possible to simulate losses from baseline by allowing participants to possess and handle a sure payoﬀ sum prior to decision making, consistent with the house money eﬀect (Thaler & Johnson, 1990), metaanalysis reveals that this technique increases risk taking (Weber et al., 2004), a pattern opposite to what one might expect if the method simulated losses from baseline. 
The risky behaviors inventory was included in order to allow us to control for individual diﬀerences in the propensity to take risks. 
Although scores on the 20point risky behaviors scale did correlate with performance on the Choice Task, it is nevertheless likely that the measure was only partially successful. 
Importantly, we failed to include ﬁnancial risk taking in our inventory, yet behavior in gambling-type tasks correlates incompletely with decision making in non-gambling domains (Goldstein & Weber, 1997; Johnson et al., n.d.), and self-reported gambling behavior correlates only partly with self-reports of other forms of risk taking (Johnson et al., n.d.; Weber et al., 2002). 
Because risk taking appears to be somew hat domainspeciﬁc (Johnson et al., n.d.; Weber et al., 2002), our results do not prove that anger and disgust exercise the same inﬂuences on risk taking in all domains. 
Indeed, an evolutionary perspective suggests that the patterns that we have documented should vary somewhat across domains. 
For example, although anger is predicted to generally have a more muted impact on risk taking among women, because womenÕs reproduction is more constrained than menÕs, thus causing a given oﬀspring to often be more important to the motherÕs ﬁtness than to the fatherÕs, the sex diﬀerence in the eﬀect of anger on risk taking should be diminished in cases where the eliciting transgression involves threats to oneÕs child (Campbell, 2002, pp. 94–99). 
Additional investigations using measures of risk taking in non-ﬁnancial domains are therefore in order. 
There is some evidence that the sexes diﬀer on measures of the physiological correlates of anger and disgust even when self-reports are held constant, with men being more reactive to exogenous anger-eliciting stimuli and women being more reactive to exogenous disgust-eliciting stimuli (Kring & Gordon, 1998; see also review in Kring, 2000). 
Because we did not measure physiological responses, despite the absence of a sex diﬀerence in both of our manipulation checks, we cannot rule out the possibility that the sex diﬀerences whi ch we have found reﬂect diﬀerences in anger and disgust reactivity rather than dimorphisms in the operation of these emotions at a given level of intensity. 
Future directions An evolutionary perspective suggests that the utility of male risk taking in response to transgression is greater for young men than for older men, as the former enter the competitive arena without an established reputation in this regard, and with little to lose (Wilson & Daly, 1993). 
Likewise, the hazards posed to women by contaminants are greatest during the reproductive years. 
Together, these observations suggest that both the impact of anger on male risk taking and the impact of disgust on female risk taking shou ld decrease across adulthood (compare with Loewenstein et al., 2001, p. 280). 
A sample encompassing wider age ranges than that employed here would allow for the investigation of these possibilities. 
Personality, which exercises a direct eﬀect on likelihood estimations independent of state aﬀect (Zelenski & Larsen, 2002), may also moderate the eﬀects of anger and disgust on risk taking (cf. Hockey et al., 2000; Rusting & Nolen-Hoeksema, 1998); self-esteem may prove to be an especially important moderator of the impact of these emotions (Kirkpatrick, Waugh, Valencia, & Webster, 2002). 
Individual diﬀerences in the degree to which emotions are attended to also likely impact their eﬀects on risk taking, particularly in experiments involving induction (DeSte no et al., 2000; Gasper & Clore, 2000). 
Although we did not investigate individual diﬀerences in traits such as need for cognition, doing so may shed further light on the ways in which anger and disgust inﬂuence risk taking behavior. 
In addition to speciﬁc predictions regarding sex differences in the eﬀects of anger and disgust, an evolutionary approach also suggests overarching sex diﬀerences in the propensity to take risks. 
Because the potential variance in female reproductive success is much lower than that in male reproductive success, females generally proﬁt from a low-risk strategy that emphasizes steady returns. 
In contrast, males have more to gain and less to lose from risk taking (Daly & Wilson, 1988; Eckel & Grossman, 2002; Rubin & Paul, 1979; Wilson & Daly, 1985). 
In addition to accounting for sex diﬀerences in risk estimations such as those reported by Lerner et al. (2003), this reasoning suggests that any mechanism that increases risk taking can be expecte d to generally exercise a stronger eﬀect on males, while any mechanism that decreases risk taking can be expected to generally exercise a stronger effect on females. 
While domain-speciﬁc eﬀects may sometimes fail to conform to the predicted pattern, this generalization can nonetheless usefully inform a wide range of investigations of the eﬀects of emotions on risk taking. 
Shame and embarrassment may be productive targets for future investigations of the inﬂuence of emotions on risk taking. 
Though closely linked in English, shame and embarrassment are distinct emotions, each associated with a unique functional objective. 
Shame marks a drop in social standing caused by a signiﬁcant failure to live up to standards for behavior. 
Because a drop in social standing is associated with a decrease in future prospects, and because the value of taking risks is inversely related to such prospects, shame can be expecte d to increase risk taking (Fessler, 2001a). 
Embarrassment, which marks an unintentional violation of a norm, motivates appeasement in the service of reincorporation (Keltner & Buswell, 1997). 
Because the goal of such action is to reassure others of oneÕs social acceptability (Leary, Landel, & Patton, 1996), embarr assment can be expected to enhance caution with regard to norm conformity, decreasing risk taking in this domain. 
Although Baumeister and associates (Baumeister, Heatherton, & Tice, 1993; Leith & Baumeister, 1996) have employed manipulations that likely induced shame and embarrassment, their methods did not diﬀerentiate between these emotions. 
We did not examine the proximate mechanisms whereby emotions inﬂuence risk taking. 
Further exploration of the eﬀects of emotions on the colori ng of subjective probabilities, the weighting of costs versus beneﬁts, the subjective utility of various outcomes, and the rapidity with which decisions are made may prove productive, and may shed light on the decision making processes that produced the results documented here. 
Appendix A. Oral instruction script for choice task and emotion induction  I would like to explain to you what we will be doing today. 
 In a few minutes, we are going to do what is called a choice task. 
 You will be given four sets of choices. 
 In each set, you will be asked to choose between two options. 
 One of those options will be a guaranteed sum of money; and the other will be a chance to win some greater amount of money with a known probability. 
 You should make each choice independently of the other choices. 
 After you have made all four choices, we will randomly select one set of choices using this spinner (show spinner). 
 If you chose the guaranteed payment in that set, you will receive that amount of money. 
 If you chose the chance to win in that set, you will play a lottery-style game for the greater amount of money. 
 I will put 20 marbles of two diﬀerent colors into a bag, in the appropriate proportions. 
 You will blindly remove one marbl e from that bag. 
 If you draw a black marble, you win; if you draw a clear marble, you do not. 
 For example, if the choice set that gets selected includes a 50/50 chance to win, and you chose that option, I would put 10 black marbles and 10 clear marbles into the bag. 
 You will draw one marble from the bag. 
 If you draw the black marble, you will get the money, and if you draw the clear marble, you will not. 
 If you had chosen the guaranteed option, of course, you would get the set amount of money no matter what. 
 Do you have any questions? 
 Great. 
Now, before we do that, I would like you to complete a small visualization task. 
 You will write for a few minutes about whatever the instructions inside this envelope say (hold up envelope). 
 I donÕt know which set of instructions youÕve gotten, and to ensure your privacy, IÕll knock on the door in a couple of minutes, at which time you should put the form back in the envelope and seal it.  IÕll come back in the room then, and we will do the choice task. 
 DonÕt worry about style, spelling, or grammar, just read carefully and follow the instructions. 
 ItÕs very important that you concentrate on this. 
 What you write will be completely anonymous, and the envelope will not be opened until the entire project is complete. 
 Do you have any (other) questions? 
Appendix B. The choice task This form to be ﬁlled out by the experimenter. 
Participant ID #: ____________ READ ALOUD: There are four rounds in this game. 
For each round , you will choose one option, either option 1 or option 2. Each decision should be made independently of the decisions made in every other round. 
One round will be randomly selected, and you will be paid only according to the choice you made for that round. 
Round A: Do you prefer: 1. $15 (guaranteed) OR 2. $18.75 (16 out of 20; 80%) Round B: Do you prefer: 1. $15 (guaranteed) OR 2. $37.50 (8 out of 20; 40%) Round C: Do you prefer: 1. $15 (guaranteed) OR 2. $75.00 (4 out of 20; 20%) Round D: Do you prefer: 1. $15 (guaranteed) OR 2. $300.00 (1 out of 20; 5%) Round selected for payment:_______ Total payment made:___________ References Alexander, R. D., Hoogland, J. L., Howard, R. D., Noonan, K. M., & Sherman, P. W. (1979). 
Sexual dimorphism and breeding systems in pinnipeds, ungulates, primates and humans. 
In N. A. Chagnon & W. Irons (Eds.), Evolutionary biology and human social behavior: An anthropological perspective (pp. 
402–435). 
North Scituate, MA: Duxbury Press. 
Arkes, H. R., Herren, L. T., & Isen, A. M. (1988). 
The role of potential loss in the inﬂuence of aﬀect on risk-taking behavior. 
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 42, 181–193. 
Baumeister, R. F., Heatherton, T. F., & Tice, D. M. (1993). 
When ego threats lead to self-regulation failure: Negative consequences of high self-esteem. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 64, 141–156. 
Bosman, R., & van Winden, F. (2001). 
Anticipated and experienced emotions in an investment experiment. 
Tinbergen Institute Discussion Paper #TI 2001-058/1. 
Electronic document, available from: <http://www.tinbergen.nl>, accessed 7/5/03. 
Brody, L. R., Lovas, G. S., & Hay, D. H. (1995). 
Gender diﬀerences in anger and fear as a function of situational context. 
Sex Roles, 32, 47–78. 
Buss, D. M. (1989). 
Conﬂict between the sexes: Strategic interference and the evocation of anger and upset. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 56, 735–747. 
Buss, D. M., Larsen, R. J., Westen, D., & Semmelroth, J. (1992). 
Sex diﬀerences in jealousy: Evolution, physiology, and psychology. 
Psychological Science, 3, 251–255. 
Byrnes, J. P., Miller, D. C., & Schafer, W. D. (1999). 
Gender diﬀerences in risk taking: A meta-analysis. 
Psychological Bulletin, 125, 367–383. 
Campbell, A. (2002). 
A mind of her own: The evolutionary psychology of women. 
New York: Oxford University Press. 
Charland, L. C. (1998). 
Appreciation and emotion: Theoretical reﬂections on the MacArthur treatment competence study. 
Kennedy Institute of Ethics Journal, 8, 359–376. 
Clore, G. L., Gasper, K., & Garvin, E. (2001). 
Aﬀect as information. 
In J. P. Forgas (Ed.), Handbook of aﬀect and social cognition (pp. 
121–144). 
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Cosmides, L., & Tooby, J. (2000). 
Evolutionary psychology and the emotions. 
In M. Lewis & J. M. Haviland-Jones (Eds.), Handbook of emotions (2nd ed.) (pp. 
91–115). 
New York: Guilford Press. 
Curtis, V., Aunger, R., & Rabie, T. (2004). 
Evidence that disgust evolved to protect from risk of disease. 
Proceedings of the Royal Society London B, 271, S131–133. 
Curtis, V., & Biran, A. (2001). 
Dirt, disgust, and disease: Is hygiene in our genes?. 
Perspectives in Biology and Medicine, 44, 17–31. 
Daly, M., & Wilson, M. (1988). 
Homicide. 
New York: A. de Gruyter. 
Daly, M., & Wilson, M. (1990). 
Killing the competition: Female/ female and male/male homicide. 
Human Nature, 1, 81–107. 
Damasio, A. R. (1994). 
DescartesÕ error: Emotion, reason, and the human brain. 
New York: Putnam. 
DeSteno, D., Petty, R. E., Wegener, D. T., & Rucker, D. D. (2000). 
Beyond valence in the perception of likelihood: The role of emotion speciﬁcity. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78, 397–416. 
Eckel, C. C., & Grossman, P. J. (2002). 
Sex diﬀerences and statistical stereotyping in attitudes toward ﬁnancial risk. 
Evolution and Human Behavior, 23, 281–295. 
Edwards, D. C. (1999). 
Motivation and emotion: Evolutionary, physiological, cognitive, and social inﬂuences. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Elster, J. (1998). 
Emotions and economic theory. 
Journal of Economic Literature, 36, 47–74. 
Felson, R. B. (1997). 
Anger, aggression, and violence in love triangles. 
Violence and Victims, 12, 345–362. 
Fessler, D. M. T. (2001a). 
Emotions and cost/beneﬁt assessment: The role of shame and self-esteem in risk taking. 
In R. Selten & G. Gigerenzer (Eds.), Bounded rationality: The adaptive toolbox (pp. 
191–214). 
Cambridge, MA: MIT University Press. 
Fessler, D. M. T. (2001b). 
Luteal phase immunosuppression and meat eating. 
Rivista di Biologia/Biology Forum, 94, 407–430. 
Fessler, D. M. T. (2002). 
Reproductive immunosuppression and diet: An evolutionary perspective on pregnancy sickness and meat consumption. 
Current Anthropology, 43, 19–39, See also pp. 48–61. 
Fessler, D. M. T., & Navarrete, C. D. (2003). 
Meat is good to taboo: Dietary proscriptions as a product of the interaction of psychological mechanisms and social processes. 
Journal of Cognition and Culture, 3, 1–40. 
Fetchenhauer, D., & Rohde, P. A. (2002). 
Evolutionary personality psychology and victimology: Sex diﬀerences in risk attitudes and short-term orientation and their relation to sex diﬀerences in victimizations. 
Evolution and Human Behavior, 23, 233–244. 
Fischer, A. H., & Manstead, A. S. R. (2000). 
The relation between gender and emotion in diﬀerent cultures. 
In A. H. Fischer (Ed.), Gender and emotion: Social psychological perspectives. 
Studies in emotion and social interaction. 
Second series (pp. 
71–94). 
New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Folstad, I., & Karter, A. K. (1992). 
Parasites, bright males and the immunocompetence handicap. 
American Naturalist, 139, 603–622. 
Frank, R. H. (1988). 
Passions within reason: The strategic role of the emotions. 
New York: W.W. 
Norton. 
Frijda, N. H. (1986). 
The emotions. 
New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Frijda, N. H. (1994). 
Emotions are functional, most of the time. 
In P. Ekman & R. J. Davidson (Eds.), The nature of emotion: Fundamental questions (pp. 
112–122). 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Gasper, K., & Clore, G. L. (2000). 
Do you have to pay attention to your feelings to be inﬂuenced by them? 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,26, 698–711. 
Ghiglieri, M. P. (1999). 
The dark side of man: Tracing the origins of male violence. 
Reading, MA: Perseus Books. 
Gigerenzer, G., & Hoﬀrage, U. (1995). 
How to improve Bayesian reasoning without instruction: Frequency formats. 
Psychological Review, 102, 684–704. 
Goldstein, W. M., & Weber, E. U. (1997). 
Content and discontent: Indications and implications of domain speciﬁcity in preferential decision making. 
In W. M. Goldstein & R. M. Hogarth (Eds.), Research on judgment and decision making: Currents, connections, and controversies. 
Cambridge series on judgment and decision making (pp. 
566–617). 
New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Haidt, J., McCauley, C., & Rozin, P. (1994). 
Individual diﬀerences in sensitivity to disgust: A scale sampling seven domains of disgust elicitors. 
Personality and Individual Diﬀerences, 16, 701–713. 
Henrich, J., & McElreath, R. (2002). 
Are peasants risk averse decisionmakers? 
Current Anthropology,43, 172–181. 
Hirshleifer, J. (1987). 
On emotions as guarantors of threats and promises. 
In J. Dupre (Ed.), The latest on the best: Essays on evolution and optimality (pp. 
307–326). 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Hockey, G. R. J., Maule, A. J., Clough, P. J., & Bdzola, L. (2000). 
Eﬀects of negative mood states on risk in everyday decision making. 
Cognition and Emotion, 14, 823–856. 
Holden, C., & Mace, R. (1999). 
Sexual dimorphism in stature and womenÕs work: A phylogenetic cross-cultural analysis. 
American Journal of Physical Anthropology, 110, 27–45. 
Isen, A. M., & Geva, N. (1987). 
The inﬂuence of positive aﬀect on acceptable level of risk: The person with a large canoe has a large worry. 
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 39, 145–154. 
Isen, A. M., Nygren, T. E., & Ashby, F. G. (1988). 
Inﬂuence of positive aﬀect on the subjective utility of gains and losses: It is just not worth the risk. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 55, 710–717. 
Isen, A. M., & Patrick, R. (1983). 
The eﬀect of positive feelings on risk taking: When the chips are down. 
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 31, 194–202. 
Johnston, V. S. (1999). 
Why we feel: The science of human emotions. 
Reading, MA: Perseus Books. 
Johnson, E. J., & Tversky, A. (1983). 
Aﬀect, generalization, and the perception of risk. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 45, 20–31. 
Johnson, J. G., Wilke, A., & Weber, E. U. (n.d.). 
Beyond a trait view of risk-taking: A domain-speciﬁc scale measuring risk perceptions, expected beneﬁts, and perceived-risk attitude in german-speaking populations. 
Unpublished manuscript. 
Kahneman, D., Knetsch, J., & Thaler, R. (1991). 
The endowment eﬀect, loss aversion, and status quo bias. 
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 5, 193–206. 
Katz, J. (1999). 
How emotions work. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Keltner, D., & Buswell, B. N. (1997). 
Embarrassment: Its distinct form and appeasement functions. 
Psychological Bulletin, 122, 250–270. 
Ketelaar, T., & Clore, G. L. (1997). 
Emotions and reason: The proximate eﬀects and ultimate functions of emotions. 
In G. Matthews (Ed.), Personality, emotion, and cognitive science (pp. 
355–396). 
Amsterdam: Elsevier. 
Kirkpatrick, L. A., Waugh, C. E., Valencia, A., & Webster, G. D. (2002). 
The functional domain speciﬁcity of self-esteem and the diﬀerential prediction of aggression. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 82, 756–767. 
Kring, A. M. (2000). 
Gender and anger. 
In A. H. Fischer (Ed.), Gender and emotion: Social psychological perspectives. 
Studies in emotion and social interaction. 
Second series (pp. 
211–231). 
New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Kring, A. M., & Gordon, A. H. (1998). 
Sex diﬀerences in emotion: Expression, experience, and physiology. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 686–703. 
Lazarus, R. S. (1991). 
Emotion and adaptation. 
New York: Oxford University Press. 
Leary, M. R., Landel, J. L., & Patton, K. M. (1996). 
The motivated expression of embarassment following a self-presentational predicament. 
Journal of Personality, 64, 619–636. 
Leith, K. P., & Baumeister, R. F. (1996). 
Why do bad moods increase self-defeating behavior? 
Emotion, risk tasking, and selfregulation. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 71, 1250–1267. 
Lerner, J. S., Gonzalez, R. M., Small, D. A., & Fischhoﬀ, B. (2003). 
Eﬀects of fear and anger on perceived risks of terrorism: A national ﬁeld experiment. 
Psychological Science, 14, 144–150. 
Lerner, J. S., & Keltner, D. (2000). 
Beyond valence: Toward a model of emotion-speciﬁc inﬂuences on judgement and choice. 
Cognition and Emotion. 
Special Issue: Emotion, cognition, and decision making, 14, 473–493. 
Lerner, J. S., & Keltner, D. (2001). 
Fear, anger, and risk. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81, 146–159. 
Levenson, R. W. (1999). 
The intrapersonal functions of emotion. 
Cognition and Emotion. 
Special issue: Functional accounts of emotion, 13, 481–504. 
Loewenstein, G. (2000). 
Emotions in economic theory and economic behavior. 
American Economic Review, 90, 426–432. 
Loewenstein, G., & Lerner, J. S. (2002). 
The role of aﬀect in decision making. 
In R. Davidson, K. Scherer, & H. Goldsmith (Eds.), Handbook of aﬀective science (pp. 
619–642). 
New York: Oxford University Press. 
Loewenstein, G. F., Weber, E. U., Hsee, C. K., & Welch, N. (2001). 
Risk as feelings. 
Psychological Bulletin, 127, 267–286. 
Mano, H. (1992). 
Judgments under distress: Assessing the role of unpleasantness and arousal in judgment formation. 
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 52, 216–245. 
McGuire, M. T., & Troisi, A. (1990). 
Anger: An evolutionary view. 
In R. Plutchik & H. Kellerman (Eds.). 
Emotion, psychopathology, and psychotherapy (Vol. 
5, pp. 43–57). 
San Diego, CA: Academic Press. 
Mellers, B. A., & McGraw, A. P. (2001). 
Anticipated emotions as guides to choice. 
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 10, 210–214. 
Mellers, B., Schwartz, A., & Ritov, I. (1999). 
Emotion-based choice. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 128, 332–345. 
Milovchevich, D., Howells, K., Drew, N., & Day, A. (2001). 
Sex and gender role diﬀerences in anger: An Australian community study. 
Personality and Individual Diﬀerences, 31, 117–127. 
Mullen, P. E., & Martin, J. L. (1994). 
Jealousy: A community study. 
British Journal of Psychiatry, 164, 35–43. 
Nabi, R. L. (2002). 
The theoretical versus the lay meaning of disgust: Implications for emotion research. 
Cognition and Emotion, 16, 695–703. 
Nesse, R. M. (1990). 
Evolutionary explanations of emotions. 
Human Nature, 1, 261–289. 
Nygren, T. E., Isen, A. M., Taylor, P. J., & Dulin, J. (1996). 
The inﬂuence of positive aﬀect on the decision rule in risk situations: Focus on outcome (and especially avoidance of loss) rather than probability. 
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 66, 59–72. 
O ¨ ehman, A., & Mineka, S. (2001). 
Fears, phobias, and preparedness: Toward an evolved module of fear and fear learning. 
Psychological Review, 108, 483–522. 
Pillutla, M. M., & Murnighan, J. K. (1996). 
Unfairness, anger, and spite: Emotional rejections of ultimatum oﬀers. 
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 68, 208–224. 
Plavcan, J. M., & Van Schaik, C. P. (1997). 
Intrasexual competition and body weight dimorphism in anthropoid primates. 
American Journal of Physical Anthropology, 103, 37–68. 
Polivy, J. (1981). 
On the induction of emotion in the laboratory: Discrete moods or multiple aﬀect states?. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 41, 803–817. 
Quigley, J. F., Sherman, M. F., & Sherman, N. C. (1997). 
Personality disorder symptoms, gender, and age as predictors of adolescent disgust sensitivity. 
Personality and Individual Diﬀerences, 22, 661–667. 
Raghunathan, R., & Pham, M. T. (1999). 
All negative moods are not equal: Motivational inﬂuences of anxiety and sadness on decision making. 
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 79, 56–77. 
Rhodes, G., Chan, J., Zebrowitz, L. A., & Simmons, L. W. (2003). 
Does sexual dimorphism in human faces signal health?. 
Proceedings of the Royal Society London B, 270, 93–95. 
Rubin, P., & Paul, C. W. (1979). 
An evolutionary model of taste for risk. 
Economic Inquiry, 17, 585–596. 
Rusting, C. L., & Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (1998). 
Regulating responses to anger: Eﬀects of rumination and distraction on angry mood. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 790–803. 
Scherer, K. R., & Wallbott, H. G. (1994). 
Evidence for universality and cultural variation of diﬀerential emotion response patterning. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 66, 310–328. 
Schwarz, N. (2000). 
Emotion, cognition, and decision making. 
Cognition and Emotion. 
Special issue: Emotion, cognition, and decision making, 14, 433–440. 
Smith, C. A., & Ellsworth, P. C. (1985). 
Patterns of cognitive appraisal in emotion. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 48, 813–838. 
Smuts, B. B., Cheney, D. L., Seyfarth, R. M., & Struhsaker, T. T. (Eds.). (1987). 
Primate societies. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Thaler, R. H., & Johnson, E. J. (1990). 
Gambling with the house money and trying to break even: The eﬀects of prior outcomes on risky choice. 
Management Science, 36, 643–660. 
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1981). 
The framing of decisions and the psychology of choice. 
Science, 211, 453–458. 
Watson, D., & Clark, L. A. (1994). 
The PANAS-X manual for the positive and negative aﬀect schedule-expanded form. 
University of Iowa electronic document. 
Available from: <http://www.psychology.uiowa.edu/faculty/Clark/PANAS-X.pdf>, accessed 1/1/02. 
Weber, E. U., Blais, A.-R., & Betz, N. E. (2002). 
A domain-speciﬁc risk-attitude scale: Measuring risk perceptions and risk behaviors. 
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 15, 263–290. 
Weber, E. U., Shaﬁr, S., & Blais, A.-R. (2004). 
Predicting risksensitivity in humans and lower animals: Risk as variance or coeﬃcient of variation. 
Psychological Review, 111, 430–445. 
Weisfeld, G. E. (1997). 
Discrete emotions theory with speciﬁc reference to pride and shame. 
In N. L. Segal, G. E. Weisfeld, & C. C. Weisfeld (Eds.), Uniting psychology and biology: Integrative perspectives on human development (pp. 
419–443). 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 
Wilson, M., & Daly, M. (1985). 
Competitiveness, risk taking, and violence: The young male syndrome. 
Ethology and Sociobiology, 6, 59–73. 
Wilson, M., & Daly, M. (1992). 
The man who mistook his wife for a chattel. 
In J. H. Barkow, L. Cosmides, & J. Tooby (Eds.), The adapted mind: Evolutionary psychology and the generation of culture (pp. 
289–322). 
New York: Oxford University Press. 
Wilson, M., & Daly, M. (1993). 
Lethal confrontational violence among young men. 
In N. J. Bell & R. W. Bell (Eds.), Adolescent risk taking (pp. 
84–106). 
Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 
Winer, B. J. (1971). 
Statistical principles in experimental design. 
New York: McGraw-Hill. 
Wright, W. F., & Bower, G. H. (1992). 
Mood eﬀects on subjective probability assessment. 
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 52, 276–291. 
Wronska, J. (1990). 
Disgust in relation to emotionality, extraversion, psychoticism and imagery abilities. 
In P. J. D. Drenth, J. A. Sergeant, & R. J. Takens (Eds.). 
European perspectives in psychology (Vol. 
1, pp. 125–138). 
Chichester: Wiley. 
Zelenski, J. M., & Larsen, R. J. (2002). 
Predicting the future: How aﬀect-related personality traits inﬂuence likelihood judgments of future events. 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28, 1000–1010. 
D.M.T. 
Fessler et al. / Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 95 (2004) 107–123 123 